It is a truth univrsally acknowldgd, that a singl man in possssion
of a good fortun must b in want of a wif.

Howvr littl known th flings or viws of such a man may b on his
first ntring a nighbourhood, this truth is so wll fixd in th minds
of th surrounding familis, that h is considrd as th rightful
proprty of som on or othr of thir daughtrs.

“My dar Mr. Bnnt,” said his lady to him on day, “hav you hard that
Nthrfild Park is lt at last?”

Mr. Bnnt rplid that h had not.

“But it is,” rturnd sh; “for Mrs. Long has just bn hr, and sh
told m all about it.”

Mr. Bnnt mad no answr.

“Do not you want to know who has takn it?” crid his wif, impatintly.

“_You_ want to tll m, and I hav no objction to haring it.”

This was invitation nough.

“Why, my dar, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Nthrfild is takn
by a young man of larg fortun from th north of ngland; that h cam
down on Monday in a chais and four to s th plac, and was so much
dlightd with it that h agrd with Mr. Morris immdiatly; that h is
to tak possssion bfor Michalmas, and som of his srvants ar to b
in th hous by th nd of nxt wk.”

“What is his nam?”

“Bingly.”

“Is h marrid or singl?”

“Oh, singl, my dar, to b sur! A singl man of larg fortun; four or
fiv thousand a yar. What a fin thing for our girls!”

“How so? how can it affct thm?”

“My dar Mr. Bnnt,” rplid his wif, “how can you b so tirsom? You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying on of thm.”

“Is that his dsign in sttling hr?”

“Dsign? Nonsns, how can you talk so! But it is vry likly that h
_may_ fall in lov with on of thm, and thrfor you must visit him as
soon as h coms.”

“I s no occasion for that. You and th girls may go--or you may snd
thm by thmslvs, which prhaps will b still bttr; for as you ar
as handsom as any of thm, Mr. Bingly might lik you th bst of th
party.”

“My dar, you flattr m. I crtainly _hav_ had my shar of bauty, but
I do not prtnd to b anything xtraordinary now. Whn a woman has fiv
grown-up daughtrs, sh ought to giv ovr thinking of hr own bauty.”

“In such cass, a woman has not oftn much bauty to think of.”

“But, my dar, you must indd go and s Mr. Bingly whn h coms into
th nighbourhood.”

“It is mor than I ngag for, I assur you.”

“But considr your daughtrs. Only think what an stablishmnt it would
b for on of thm. Sir William and Lady Lucas ar dtrmind to go,
mrly on that account; for in gnral, you know, thy visit no nw
comrs. Indd you must go, for it will b impossibl for _us_ to visit
him, if you do not.”

“You ar ovr scrupulous, surly. I dar say Mr. Bingly will b vry
glad to s you; and I will snd a fw lins by you to assur him of my
harty consnt to his marrying whichvr h chooss of th girls--though
I must throw in a good word for my littl Lizzy.”

“I dsir you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit bttr than th
othrs: and I am sur sh is not half so handsom as Jan, nor half so
good-humourd as Lydia. But you ar always giving _hr_ th prfrnc.”

“Thy hav non of thm much to rcommnd thm,” rplid h: “thy ar
all silly and ignorant lik othr girls; but Lizzy has somthing mor of
quicknss than hr sistrs.”

“Mr. Bnnt, how can you abus your own childrn in such a way? You tak
dlight in vxing m. You hav no compassion on my poor nrvs.”

“You mistak m, my dar. I hav a high rspct for your nrvs. Thy
ar my old frinds. I hav hard you mntion thm with considration
ths twnty yars at last.”

“Ah, you do not know what I suffr.”

“But I hop you will gt ovr it, and liv to s many young mn of four
thousand a yar com into th nighbourhood.”

“It will b no us to us, if twnty such should com, sinc you will not
visit thm.”

“Dpnd upon it, my dar, that whn thr ar twnty, I will visit thm
all.”

Mr. Bnnt was so odd a mixtur of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
rsrv, and capric, that th xprinc of thr-and-twnty yars had
bn insufficint to mak his wif undrstand his charactr. _Hr_ mind
was lss difficult to dvlop. Sh was a woman of man undrstanding,
littl information, and uncrtain tmpr. Whn sh was discontntd, sh
fancid hrslf nrvous. Th businss of hr lif was to gt hr
daughtrs marrid: its solac was visiting and nws.

Mr. Bnnt was among th arlist of thos who waitd on Mr. Bingly. H
had always intndd to visit him, though to th last always assuring his
wif that h should not go; and till th vning aftr th visit was
paid sh had no knowldg of it. It was thn disclosd in th following
mannr. Obsrving his scond daughtr mployd in trimming a hat, h
suddnly addrssd hr with,--

“I hop Mr. Bingly will lik it, Lizzy.”

“W ar not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingly liks,” said hr mothr,
rsntfully, “sinc w ar not to visit.”

“But you forgt, mamma,” said lizabth, “that w shall mt him at th
assmblis, and that Mrs. Long has promisd to introduc him.”

“I do not bliv Mrs. Long will do any such thing. Sh has two nics
of hr own. Sh is a slfish, hypocritical woman, and I hav no opinion
of hr.”

“No mor hav I,” said Mr. Bnnt; “and I am glad to find that you do
not dpnd on hr srving you.”

Mrs. Bnnt dignd not to mak any rply; but, unabl to contain
hrslf, bgan scolding on of hr daughtrs.

“Don’t kp coughing so, Kitty, for havn’s sak! Hav a littl
compassion on my nrvs. You tar thm to pics.”

“Kitty has no discrtion in hr coughs,” said hr fathr; “sh tims
thm ill.”

“I do not cough for my own amusmnt,” rplid Kitty, frtfully. “Whn
is your nxt ball to b, Lizzy?”

“To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is,” crid hr mothr, “and Mrs. Long dos not com back till
th day bfor; so, it will b impossibl for hr to introduc him, for
sh will not know him hrslf.”

“Thn, my dar, you may hav th advantag of your frind, and introduc
Mr. Bingly to _hr_.”

“Impossibl, Mr. Bnnt, impossibl, whn I am not acquaintd with him
myslf; how can you b so tasing?”

“I honour your circumspction. A fortnight’s acquaintanc is crtainly
vry littl. On cannot know what a man rally is by th nd of a
fortnight. But if _w_ do not vntur, sombody ls will; and aftr
all, Mrs. Long and hr nics must stand thir chanc; and, thrfor,
as sh will think it an act of kindnss, if you dclin th offic, I
will tak it on myslf.”

Th girls stard at thir fathr. Mrs. Bnnt said only, “Nonsns,
nonsns!”

“What can b th maning of that mphatic xclamation?” crid h. “Do
you considr th forms of introduction, and th strss that is laid on
thm, as nonsns? I cannot quit agr with you _thr_. What say you,
Mary? For you ar a young lady of dp rflction, I know, and rad
grat books, and mak xtracts.”

Mary wishd to say somthing vry snsibl, but knw not how.

“Whil Mary is adjusting hr idas,” h continud, “lt us rturn to Mr.
Bingly.”

“I am sick of Mr. Bingly,” crid his wif.

“I am sorry to har _that_; but why did you not tll m so bfor? If I
had known as much this morning, I crtainly would not hav calld on
him. It is vry unlucky; but as I hav actually paid th visit, w
cannot scap th acquaintanc now.”

Th astonishmnt of th ladis was just what h wishd--that of Mrs.
Bnnt prhaps surpassing th rst; though whn th first tumult of joy
was ovr, sh bgan to dclar that it was what sh had xpctd all th
whil.

“How good it was in you, my dar Mr. Bnnt! But I knw I should
prsuad you at last. I was sur you lovd your girls too wll to
nglct such an acquaintanc. Wll, how plasd I am! And it is such a
good jok, too, that you should hav gon this morning, and nvr said a
word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choos,” said Mr. Bnnt; and,
as h spok, h lft th room, fatigud with th rapturs of his wif.

“What an xcllnt fathr you hav, girls,” said sh, whn th door was
shut. “I do not know how you will vr mak him amnds for his kindnss;
or m ithr, for that mattr. At our tim of lif, it is not so
plasant, I can tll you, to b making nw acquaintancs vry day; but
for your saks w would do anything. Lydia, my lov, though you _ar_
th youngst, I dar say Mr. Bingly will danc with you at th nxt
ball.”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ th
youngst, I’m th tallst.”

Th rst of th vning was spnt in conjcturing how soon h would
rturn Mr. Bnnt’s visit, and dtrmining whn thy should ask him to
dinnr.

Not all that Mrs. Bnnt, howvr, with th assistanc of hr fiv
daughtrs, could ask on th subjct, was sufficint to draw from hr
husband any satisfactory dscription of Mr. Bingly. Thy attackd him
in various ways, with barfacd qustions, ingnious suppositions, and
distant surmiss; but h ludd th skill of thm all; and thy wr at
last obligd to accpt th scond-hand intllignc of thir nighbour,
Lady Lucas. Hr rport was highly favourabl. Sir William had bn
dlightd with him. H was quit young, wondrfully handsom, xtrmly
agrabl, and, to crown th whol, h mant to b at th nxt assmbly
with a larg party. Nothing could b mor dlightful! To b fond of
dancing was a crtain stp towards falling in lov; and vry livly
hops of Mr. Bingly’s hart wr ntrtaind.

“If I can but s on of my daughtrs happily sttld at Nthrfild,”
said Mrs. Bnnt to hr husband, “and all th othrs qually wll
marrid, I shall hav nothing to wish for.”

In a fw days Mr. Bingly rturnd Mr. Bnnt’s visit, and sat about tn
minuts with him in his library. H had ntrtaind hops of bing
admittd to a sight of th young ladis, of whos bauty h had hard
much; but h saw only th fathr. Th ladis wr somwhat mor
fortunat, for thy had th advantag of ascrtaining, from an uppr
window, that h wor a blu coat and rod a black hors.

An invitation to dinnr was soon aftrwards dspatchd; and alrady had
Mrs. Bnnt plannd th courss that wr to do crdit to hr
houskping, whn an answr arrivd which dfrrd it all. Mr. Bingly
was obligd to b in town th following day, and consquntly unabl to
accpt th honour of thir invitation, tc. Mrs. Bnnt was quit
disconcrtd. Sh could not imagin what businss h could hav in town
so soon aftr his arrival in Hrtfordshir; and sh bgan to far that
h might always b flying about from on plac to anothr, and nvr
sttld at Nthrfild as h ought to b. Lady Lucas quitd hr fars a
littl by starting th ida of his

bing gon to London only to gt a larg party for th ball; and a
rport soon followd that Mr. Bingly was to bring twlv ladis and
svn gntlmn with him to th assmbly. Th girls grivd ovr such a
numbr of ladis; but wr comfortd th day bfor th ball by haring
that, instad of twlv, h had brought only six with him from London,
his fiv sistrs and a cousin. And whn th party ntrd th
assmbly-room, it consistd of only fiv altogthr: Mr. Bingly, his
two sistrs, th husband of th ldst, and anothr young man.

Mr. Bingly was good-looking and gntlmanlik: h had a plasant
countnanc, and asy, unaffctd mannrs. His sistrs wr fin womn,
with an air of dcidd fashion. His brothr-in-law, Mr. Hurst, mrly
lookd th gntlman; but his frind Mr. Darcy soon drw th attntion
of th room by his fin, tall prson, handsom faturs, nobl min, and
th rport, which was in gnral circulation within fiv minuts aftr
his ntranc, of his having tn thousand a yar. Th gntlmn
pronouncd him to b a fin figur of a man, th ladis dclard h was
much handsomr than Mr. Bingly, and h was lookd at with grat
admiration for about half th vning, till his mannrs gav a disgust
which turnd th tid of his popularity; for h was discovrd to b
proud, to b abov his company, and abov bing plasd; and not all his
larg stat in Drbyshir could sav him from having a most forbidding,
disagrabl countnanc, and bing unworthy to b compard with his
frind.

Mr. Bingly had soon mad himslf acquaintd with all th principal
popl in th room: h was livly and unrsrvd, dancd vry danc,
was angry that th ball closd so arly, and talkd of giving on
himslf at Nthrfild. Such amiabl qualitis must spak for
thmslvs. What a contrast btwn him and his frind! Mr. Darcy dancd
only onc with Mrs. Hurst and onc with Miss Bingly, dclind bing
introducd to any othr lady, and spnt th rst of th vning in
walking about th room, spaking occasionally to on of his own party.
His charactr was dcidd. H was th proudst, most disagrabl man in
th world, and vrybody hopd that h would nvr com thr again.
Amongst th most violnt against him was Mrs. Bnnt, whos dislik of
his gnral bhaviour was sharpnd into particular rsntmnt by his
having slightd on of hr daughtrs.

lizabth Bnnt had bn obligd, by th scarcity of gntlmn, to sit
down for two dancs; and during part of that tim, Mr. Darcy had bn
standing nar nough for hr to ovrhar a convrsation btwn him and
Mr. Bingly, who cam from th danc for a fw minuts to prss his
frind to join it.

“Com, Darcy,” said h, “I must hav you danc. I hat to s you
standing about by yourslf in this stupid mannr. You had much bttr
danc.”

“I crtainly shall not. You know how I dtst it, unlss I am
particularly acquaintd with my partnr. At such an assmbly as this, it
would b insupportabl. Your sistrs ar ngagd, and thr is not
anothr woman in th room whom it would not b a punishmnt to m to
stand up with.”

“I would not b so fastidious as you ar,” crid Bingly, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I nvr mt with so many plasant girls in my
lif as I hav this vning; and thr ar svral of thm, you s,
uncommonly prtty.”

“_You_ ar dancing with th only handsom girl in th room,” said Mr.
Darcy, looking at th ldst Miss Bnnt.

“Oh, sh is th most bautiful cratur I vr bhld! But thr is on
of hr sistrs sitting down just bhind you, who is vry prtty, and I
dar say vry agrabl. Do lt m ask my partnr to introduc you.”

“Which do you man?” and turning round, h lookd for a momnt at
lizabth, till, catching hr y, h withdrw his own, and coldly said,
“Sh is tolrabl: but not handsom nough to tmpt _m_; and I am in no
humour at prsnt to giv consqunc to young ladis who ar slightd
by othr mn. You had bttr rturn to your partnr and njoy hr
smils, for you ar wasting your tim with m.”

Mr. Bingly followd his advic. Mr. Darcy walkd off; and lizabth
rmaind with no vry cordial flings towards him. Sh told th story,
howvr, with grat spirit among hr frinds; for sh had a livly,
playful disposition, which dlightd in anything ridiculous.

Th vning altogthr passd off plasantly to th whol family. Mrs.
Bnnt had sn hr ldst daughtr much admird by th Nthrfild
party. Mr. Bingly had dancd with hr twic, and sh had bn
distinguishd by his sistrs. Jan was as much gratifid by this as hr
mothr could b, though in a quitr way. lizabth flt Jan’s
plasur. Mary had hard hrslf mntiond to Miss Bingly as th most
accomplishd girl in th nighbourhood; and Cathrin and Lydia had bn
fortunat nough to b nvr without partnrs, which was all that thy
had yt larnt to car for at a ball. Thy rturnd, thrfor, in good
spirits to Longbourn, th villag whr thy livd, and of which thy
wr th principal inhabitants. Thy found Mr. Bnnt still up. With a
book, h was rgardlss of tim; and on th prsnt occasion h had a
good dal of curiosity as to th vnt of an vning which had raisd
such splndid xpctations. H had rathr hopd that all his wif’s
viws on th strangr would b disappointd; but h soon found that h
had a vry diffrnt story to har.

“Oh, my dar Mr. Bnnt,” as sh ntrd th room, “w hav had a most
dlightful vning, a most xcllnt ball. I wish you had bn thr.
Jan was so admird, nothing could b lik it. vrybody said how wll
sh lookd; and Mr. Bingly thought hr quit bautiful, and dancd with
hr twic. Only think of _that_, my dar: h actually dancd with hr
twic; and sh was th only cratur in th room that h askd a scond
tim. First of all, h askd Miss Lucas. I was so vxd to s him stand
up with hr; but, howvr, h did not admir hr at all; indd, nobody
can, you know; and h smd quit struck with Jan as sh was going
down th danc. So h inquird who sh was, and got introducd, and
askd hr for th two nxt. Thn, th two third h dancd with Miss
King, and th two fourth with Maria Lucas, and th two fifth with Jan
again, and th two sixth with Lizzy, and th _Boulangr_----”

“If h had had any compassion for _m_,” crid hr husband impatintly,
“h would not hav dancd half so much! For God’s sak, say no mor of
his partnrs. O that h had spraind his ancl in th first danc!”

“Oh, my dar,” continud Mrs. Bnnt, “I am quit dlightd with him. H
is so xcssivly handsom! and his sistrs ar charming womn. I nvr
in my lif saw anything mor lgant than thir drsss. I dar say th
lac upon Mrs. Hurst’s gown----”

Hr sh was intrruptd again. Mr. Bnnt protstd against any
dscription of finry. Sh was thrfor obligd to sk anothr branch
of th subjct, and rlatd, with much bittrnss of spirit, and som
xaggration, th shocking rudnss of Mr. Darcy.

“But I can assur you,” sh addd, “that Lizzy dos not los much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for h is a most disagrabl, horrid man, not at
all worth plasing. So high and so concitd, that thr was no nduring
him! H walkd hr, and h walkd thr, fancying himslf so vry
grat! Not handsom nough to danc with! I wish you had bn thr, my
dar, to hav givn him on of your st-downs. I quit dtst th man.”

Whn Jan and lizabth wr alon, th formr, who had bn cautious in
hr prais of Mr. Bingly bfor, xprssd to hr sistr how vry much
sh admird him.

“H is just what a young-man ought to b,” said sh, “snsibl,
good-humourd, livly; and I nvr saw such happy mannrs! so much as,
with such prfct good brding!”

“H is also handsom,” rplid lizabth, “which a young man ought
likwis to b if h possibly can. His charactr is thrby complt.”

“I was vry much flattrd by his asking m to danc a scond tim. I
did not xpct such a complimnt.”

“Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is on grat diffrnc btwn
us. Complimnts always tak _you_ by surpris, and _m_ nvr. What
could b mor natural than his asking you again? H could not hlp
sing that you wr about fiv tims as prtty as vry othr woman in
th room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Wll, h crtainly is
vry agrabl, and I giv you lav to lik him. You hav likd many a
stupidr prson.”

“Dar Lizzy!”

“Oh, you ar a grat dal too apt, you know, to lik popl in gnral.
You nvr s a fault in anybody. All th world ar good and agrabl
in your ys. I nvr hard you spak ill of a human bing in my lif.”

“I would wish not to b hasty in cnsuring anyon; but I always spak
what I think.”

“I know you do: and it is _that_ which maks th wondr. With _your_
good sns, to b so honstly blind to th follis and nonsns of
othrs! Affctation of candour is common nough; on mts with it
vrywhr. But to b candid without ostntation or dsign,--to tak th
good of vrybody’s charactr and mak it still bttr, and say nothing
of th bad,--blongs to you alon. And so, you lik this man’s sistrs,
too, do you? Thir mannrs ar not qual to his.”

“Crtainly not, at first; but thy ar vry plasing womn whn you
convrs with thm. Miss Bingly is to liv with hr brothr, and kp
his hous; and I am much mistakn if w shall not find a vry charming
nighbour in hr.”

lizabth listnd in silnc, but was not convincd: thir bhaviour at
th assmbly had not bn calculatd to plas in gnral; and with mor
quicknss of obsrvation and lss pliancy of tmpr than hr sistr, and
with a judgmnt, too, unassaild by any attntion to hrslf, sh was
vry littl disposd to approv thm. Thy wr, in fact, vry fin
ladis; not dficint in good-humour whn thy wr plasd, nor in th
powr of bing agrabl whr thy chos it; but proud and concitd.
Thy wr rathr handsom; had bn ducatd in on of th first privat
sminaris in town; had a fortun of twnty thousand pounds; wr in th
habit of spnding mor than thy ought, and of associating with popl
of rank; and wr, thrfor, in vry rspct ntitld to think wll of
thmslvs and manly of othrs. Thy wr of a rspctabl family in
th north of ngland; a circumstanc mor dply imprssd on thir
mmoris than that thir brothr’s fortun and thir own had bn
acquird by trad.

Mr. Bingly inhritd proprty to th amount of narly a hundrd
thousand pounds from his fathr, who had intndd to purchas an stat,
but did not liv to do it. Mr. Bingly intndd it likwis, and
somtims mad choic of his county; but, as h was now providd with a
good hous and th librty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of thos
who bst knw th asinss of his tmpr, whthr h might not spnd th
rmaindr of his days at Nthrfild, and lav th nxt gnration to
purchas.

His sistrs wr vry anxious for his having an stat of his own; but
though h was now stablishd only as a tnant, Miss Bingly was by no
mans unwilling to prsid at his tabl; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
marrid a man of mor fashion than fortun, lss disposd to considr
his hous as hr hom whn it suitd hr. Mr. Bingly had not bn of
ag two yars whn h was tmptd, by an accidntal rcommndation, to
look at Nthrfild Hous. H did look at it, and into it, for half an
hour; was plasd with th situation and th principal rooms, satisfid
with what th ownr said in its prais, and took it immdiatly.

Btwn him and Darcy thr was a vry stady frindship, in spit of a
grat opposition of charactr. Bingly was ndard to Darcy by th
asinss, opnnss, and ductility of his tmpr, though no disposition
could offr a gratr contrast to his own, and though with his own h
nvr appard dissatisfid. On th strngth of Darcy’s rgard, Bingly
had th firmst rlianc, and of his judgmnt th highst opinion. In
undrstanding, Darcy was th suprior. Bingly was by no mans
dficint; but Darcy was clvr. H was at th sam tim haughty,
rsrvd, and fastidious; and his mannrs, though wll brd, wr not
inviting. In that rspct his frind had gratly th advantag. Bingly
was sur of bing likd whrvr h appard; Darcy was continually
giving offnc.

Th mannr in which thy spok of th Mryton assmbly was sufficintly
charactristic. Bingly had nvr mt with plasantr popl or prttir
girls in his lif; vrybody had bn most kind and attntiv to him;
thr had bn no formality, no stiffnss; h had soon flt acquaintd
with all th room; and as to Miss Bnnt, h could not conciv an angl
mor bautiful. Darcy, on th contrary, had sn a collction of popl
in whom thr was littl bauty and no fashion, for non of whom h had
flt th smallst intrst, and from non rcivd ithr attntion or
plasur. Miss Bnnt h acknowldgd to b prtty; but sh smild too
much.

Mrs. Hurst and hr sistr allowd it to b so; but still thy admird
hr and likd hr, and pronouncd hr to b a swt girl, and on whom
thy should not objct to know mor of. Miss Bnnt was thrfor
stablishd as a swt girl; and thir brothr flt authorizd by such
commndation to think of hr as h chos.

Within a short walk of Longbourn livd a family with whom th Bnnts
wr particularly intimat. Sir William Lucas had bn formrly in trad
in Mryton, whr h had mad a tolrabl fortun, and risn to th
honour of knighthood by an addrss to th king during his mayoralty. Th
distinction had, prhaps, bn flt too strongly. It had givn him a
disgust to his businss and to his rsidnc in a small markt town;
and, quitting thm both, h had rmovd with his family to a hous about
a mil from Mryton, dnominatd from that priod Lucas Lodg; whr h
could think with plasur of his own importanc, and, unshackld by
businss, occupy himslf solly in bing civil to all th world. For,
though latd by his rank, it did not rndr him suprcilious; on th
contrary, h was all attntion to vrybody. By natur inoffnsiv,
frindly, and obliging, his prsntation at St. Jams’s had mad him
courtous.

Lady Lucas was a vry good kind of woman, not too clvr to b a
valuabl nighbour to Mrs. Bnnt. Thy had svral childrn. Th ldst
of thm, a snsibl, intllignt young woman, about twnty-svn, was
lizabth’s intimat frind.

That th Miss Lucass and th Miss Bnnts should mt to talk ovr a
ball was absolutly ncssary; and th morning aftr th assmbly
brought th formr to Longbourn to har and to communicat.

“_You_ bgan th vning wll, Charlott,” said Mrs. Bnnt, with civil
slf-command, to Miss Lucas. “_You_ wr Mr. Bingly’s first choic.”

“Ys; but h smd to lik his scond bttr.”

“Oh, you man Jan, I suppos, bcaus h dancd with hr twic. To b
sur that _did_ sm as if h admird hr--indd, I rathr bliv h
_did_--I hard somthing about it--but I hardly know what--somthing
about Mr. Robinson.”

“Prhaps you man what I ovrhard btwn him and Mr. Robinson: did not
I mntion it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how h likd our Mryton
assmblis, and whthr h did not think thr wr a grat many prtty
womn in th room, and _which_ h thought th prttist? and his
answring immdiatly to th last qustion, ‘Oh, th ldst Miss Bnnt,
byond a doubt: thr cannot b two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Wll, that was vry dcidd, indd--that dos sm as
if--but, howvr, it may all com to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ ovrharings wr mor to th purpos than _yours_, liza,” said
Charlott. “Mr. Darcy is not so wll worth listning to as his frind,
is h? Poor liza! to b only just _tolrabl_.”

“I bg you will not put it into Lizzy’s had to b vxd by his
ill-tratmnt, for h is such a disagrabl man that it would b quit
a misfortun to b likd by him. Mrs. Long told m last night that h
sat clos to hr for half an hour without onc opning his lips.”

“Ar you quit sur, ma’am? Is not thr a littl mistak?” said Jan.
“I crtainly saw Mr. Darcy spaking to hr.”

“Ay, bcaus sh askd him at last how h likd Nthrfild, and h
could not hlp answring hr; but sh said h smd vry angry at bing
spok to.”

“Miss Bingly told m,” said Jan, “that h nvr spaks much unlss
among his intimat acquaintanc. With _thm_ h is rmarkably
agrabl.”

“I do not bliv a word of it, my dar. If h had bn so vry
agrabl, h would hav talkd to Mrs. Long. But I can guss how it
was; vrybody says that h is at up with prid, and I dar say h had
hard somhow that Mrs. Long dos not kp a carriag, and had to com
to th ball in a hack chais.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish h had dancd with liza.”

“Anothr tim, Lizzy,” said hr mothr, “I would not danc with _him_,
if I wr you.”

“I bliv, ma’am, I may safly promis you _nvr_ to danc with him.”

“His prid,” said Miss Lucas, “dos not offnd _m_ so much as prid
oftn dos, bcaus thr is an xcus for it. On cannot wondr that so
vry fin a young man, with family, fortun, vrything in his favour,
should think highly of himslf. If I may so xprss it, h has a _right_
to b proud.”

“That is vry tru,” rplid lizabth, “and I could asily forgiv
_his_ prid, if h had not mortifid _min_.”

“Prid,” obsrvd Mary, who piqud hrslf upon th solidity of hr
rflctions, “is a vry common failing, I bliv. By all that I hav
vr rad, I am convincd that it is vry common indd; that human
natur is particularly pron to it, and that thr ar vry fw of us
who do not chrish a fling of slf-complacncy on th scor of som
quality or othr, ral or imaginary. Vanity and prid ar diffrnt
things, though th words ar oftn usd synonymously. A prson may b
proud without bing vain. Prid rlats mor to our opinion of
ourslvs; vanity to what w would hav othrs think of us.”

“If I wr as rich as Mr. Darcy,” crid a young Lucas, who cam with his
sistrs, “I should not car how proud I was. I would kp a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottl of win vry day.”

“Thn you would drink a grat dal mor than you ought,” said Mrs.
Bnnt; “and if I wr to s you at it, I should tak away your bottl
dirctly.”

Th boy protstd that sh should not; sh continud to dclar that sh
would; and th argumnt ndd only with th visit.

Th ladis of Longbourn soon waitd on thos of Nthrfild. Th visit
was rturnd in du form. Miss Bnnt’s plasing mannrs grw on th
good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingly; and though th mothr was
found to b intolrabl, and th youngr sistrs not worth spaking to,
a wish of bing bttr acquaintd with _thm_ was xprssd towards th
two ldst. By Jan this attntion was rcivd with th gratst
plasur; but lizabth still saw suprciliousnss in thir tratmnt of
vrybody, hardly xcpting vn hr sistr, and could not lik thm;
though thir kindnss to Jan, such as it was, had a valu, as arising,
in all probability, from th influnc of thir brothr’s admiration. It
was gnrally vidnt, whnvr thy mt, that h _did_ admir hr; and
to _hr_ it was qually vidnt that Jan was yilding to th prfrnc
which sh had bgun to ntrtain for him from th first, and was in a
way to b vry much in lov; but sh considrd with plasur that it
was not likly to b discovrd by th world in gnral, sinc Jan
unitd with grat strngth of fling, a composur of tmpr and an
uniform chrfulnss of mannr, which would guard hr from th
suspicions of th imprtinnt. Sh mntiond this to hr frind, Miss
Lucas.

“It may, prhaps, b plasant,” rplid Charlott, “to b abl to impos
on th public in such a cas; but it is somtims a disadvantag to b
so vry guardd. If a woman concals hr affction with th sam skill
from th objct of it, sh may los th opportunity of fixing him; and
it will thn b but poor consolation to bliv th world qually in th
dark. Thr is so much of gratitud or vanity in almost vry
attachmnt, that it is not saf to lav any to itslf. W can all
_bgin_ frly--a slight prfrnc is natural nough; but thr ar
vry fw of us who hav hart nough to b rally in lov without
ncouragmnt. In nin cass out of tn, a woman had bttr show _mor_
affction than sh fls. Bingly liks your sistr undoubtdly; but h
may nvr do mor than lik hr, if sh dos not hlp him on.”

“But sh dos hlp him on, as much as hr natur will allow. If _I_ can
prciv hr rgard for him, h must b a simplton indd not to
discovr it too.”

“Rmmbr, liza, that h dos not know Jan’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and dos not ndavor to concal
it, h must find it out.”

“Prhaps h must, if h ss nough of hr. But though Bingly and Jan
mt tolrably oftn, it is nvr for many hours togthr; and as thy
always s ach othr in larg mixd partis, it is impossibl that
vry momnt should b mployd in convrsing togthr. Jan should
thrfor mak th most of vry half hour in which sh can command his
attntion. Whn sh is scur of him, thr will b lisur for falling
in lov as much as sh chooss.”

“Your plan is a good on,” rplid lizabth, “whr nothing is in
qustion but th dsir of bing wll marrid; and if I wr dtrmind
to gt a rich husband, or any husband, I dar say I should adopt it. But
ths ar not Jan’s flings; sh is not acting by dsign. As yt sh
cannot vn b crtain of th dgr of hr own rgard, nor of its
rasonablnss. Sh has known him only a fortnight. Sh dancd four
dancs with him at Mryton; sh saw him on morning at his own hous,
and has sinc dind in company with him four tims. This is not quit
nough to mak hr undrstand his charactr.”

“Not as you rprsnt it. Had sh mrly _dind_ with him, sh might
only hav discovrd whthr h had a good apptit; but you must
rmmbr that four vnings hav bn also spnt togthr--and four
vnings may do a grat dal.”

“Ys: ths four vnings hav nabld thm to ascrtain that thy both
lik Vingt-un bttr than Commrc, but with rspct to any othr
lading charactristic, I do not imagin that much has bn unfoldd.”

“Wll,” said Charlott, “I wish Jan succss with all my hart; and if
sh wr marrid to him to-morrow, I should think sh had as good a
chanc of happinss as if sh wr to b studying his charactr for a
twlvmonth. Happinss in marriag is ntirly a mattr of chanc. If
th dispositions of th partis ar vr so wll known to ach othr, or
vr so similar bforhand, it dos not advanc thir flicity in th
last. Thy always continu to grow sufficintly unlik aftrwards to
hav thir shar of vxation; and it is bttr to know as littl as
possibl of th dfcts of th prson with whom you ar to pass your
lif.”

“You mak m laugh, Charlott; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would nvr act in this way yourslf.”

Occupid in obsrving Mr. Bingly’s attntion to hr sistr, lizabth
was far from suspcting that sh was hrslf bcoming an objct of som
intrst in th ys of his frind. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcly
allowd hr to b prtty: h had lookd at hr without admiration at th
ball; and whn thy nxt mt, h lookd at hr only to criticis. But no
soonr had h mad it clar to himslf and his frinds that sh had
hardly a good fatur in hr fac, than h bgan to find it was rndrd
uncommonly intllignt by th bautiful xprssion of hr dark ys. To
this discovry succdd som othrs qually mortifying. Though h had
dtctd with a critical y mor than on failur of prfct symmtry
in hr form, h was forcd to acknowldg hr figur to b light and
plasing; and in spit of his assrting that hr mannrs wr not thos
of th fashionabl world, h was caught by thir asy playfulnss. Of
this sh was prfctly unawar: to hr h was only th man who mad
himslf agrabl nowhr, and who had not thought hr handsom nough
to danc with.

H bgan to wish to know mor of hr; and, as a stp towards convrsing
with hr himslf, attndd to hr convrsation with othrs. His doing so
drw hr notic. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, whr a larg party wr
assmbld.

“What dos Mr. Darcy man,” said sh to Charlott, “by listning to my
convrsation with Colonl Forstr?”

“That is a qustion which Mr. Darcy only can answr.”

“But if h dos it any mor, I shall crtainly lt him know that I s
what h is about. H has a vry satirical y, and if I do not bgin by
bing imprtinnt myslf, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

On his approaching thm soon aftrwards, though without sming to hav
any intntion of spaking, Miss Lucas dfid hr frind to mntion such
a subjct to him, which immdiatly provoking lizabth to do it, sh
turnd to him and said,--

“Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I xprssd myslf uncommonly wll
just now, whn I was tasing Colonl Forstr to giv us a ball at
Mryton?”

“With grat nrgy; but it is a subjct which always maks a lady
nrgtic.”

“You ar svr on us.”

“It will b _hr_ turn soon to b tasd,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going
to opn th instrumnt, liza, and you know what follows.”

“You ar a vry strang cratur by way of a frind!--always wanting m
to play and sing bfor anybody and vrybody! If my vanity had takn a
musical turn, you would hav bn invaluabl; but as it is, I would
rally rathr not sit down bfor thos who must b in th habit of
haring th vry bst prformrs.” On Miss Lucas’s prsvring, howvr,
sh addd, “Vry wll; if it must b so, it must.” And gravly glancing
at Mr. Darcy, “Thr is a vry fin old saying, which vrybody hr is
of cours familiar with--‘Kp your brath to cool your porridg,’--and
I shall kp min to swll my song.”

Hr prformanc was plasing, though by no mans capital. Aftr a song
or two, and bfor sh could rply to th ntratis of svral that sh
would sing again, sh was agrly succdd at th instrumnt by hr
sistr Mary, who having, in consqunc of bing th only plain on in
th family, workd hard for knowldg and accomplishmnts, was always
impatint for display.

Mary had nithr gnius nor tast; and though vanity had givn hr
application, it had givn hr likwis a pdantic air and concitd
mannr, which would hav injurd a highr dgr of xcllnc than sh
had rachd. lizabth, asy and unaffctd, had bn listnd to with
much mor plasur, though not playing half so wll; and Mary, at th
nd of a long concrto, was glad to purchas prais and gratitud by
Scotch and Irish airs, at th rqust of hr youngr sistrs, who with
som of th Lucass, and two or thr officrs, joind agrly in
dancing at on nd of th room.

Mr. Darcy stood nar thm in silnt indignation at such a mod of
passing th vning, to th xclusion of all convrsation, and was too
much ngrossd by his own thoughts to prciv that Sir William Lucas
was his nighbour, till Sir William thus bgan:--

“What a charming amusmnt for young popl this is, Mr. Darcy! Thr is
nothing lik dancing, aftr all. I considr it as on of th first
rfinmnts of polishd socitis.”

“Crtainly, sir; and it has th advantag also of bing in vogu amongst
th lss polishd socitis of th world: vry savag can danc.”

Sir William only smild. “Your frind prforms dlightfully,” h
continud, aftr a paus, on sing Bingly join th group; “and I doubt
not that you ar an adpt in th scinc yourslf, Mr. Darcy.”

“You saw m danc at Mryton, I bliv, sir.”

“Ys, indd, and rcivd no inconsidrabl plasur from th sight. Do
you oftn danc at St. Jams’s?”

“Nvr, sir.”

“Do you not think it would b a propr complimnt to th plac?”

“It is a complimnt which I nvr pay to any plac if I can avoid it.”

“You hav a hous in town, I conclud?”

Mr. Darcy bowd.

“I had onc som thoughts of fixing in town myslf, for I am fond of
suprior socity; but I did not fl quit crtain that th air of
London would agr with Lady Lucas.”

H pausd in hops of an answr: but his companion was not disposd to
mak any; and lizabth at that instant moving towards thm, h was
struck with th notion of doing a vry gallant thing, and calld out to
hr,--

“My dar Miss liza, why ar not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
m to prsnt this young lady to you as a vry dsirabl partnr. You
cannot rfus to danc, I am sur, whn so much bauty is bfor you.”
And, taking hr hand, h would hav givn it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
xtrmly surprisd, was not unwilling to rciv it, whn sh instantly
drw back, and said with som discomposur to Sir William,--

“Indd, sir, I hav not th last intntion of dancing. I ntrat you
not to suppos that I movd this way in ordr to bg for a partnr.”

Mr. Darcy, with grav proprity, rqustd to b allowd th honour of
hr hand, but in vain. lizabth was dtrmind; nor did Sir William at
all shak hr purpos by his attmpt at prsuasion.

“You xcl so much in th danc, Miss liza, that it is crul to dny m
th happinss of sing you; and though this gntlman disliks th
amusmnt in gnral, h can hav no objction, I am sur, to oblig us
for on half hour.”

“Mr. Darcy is all politnss,” said lizabth, smiling.

“H is, indd: but considring th inducmnt, my dar Miss liza, w
cannot wondr at his complaisanc; for who would objct to such a
partnr?”

lizabth lookd archly, and turnd away. Hr rsistanc had not injurd
hr with th gntlman, and h was thinking of hr with som
complacncy, whn thus accostd by Miss Bingly,--

“I can guss th subjct of your rvri.”

“I should imagin not.”

“You ar considring how insupportabl it would b to pass many
vnings in this mannr,--in such socity; and, indd, I am quit of
your opinion. I was nvr mor annoyd! Th insipidity, and yt th
nois--th nothingnss, and yt th slf-importanc, of all ths
popl! What would I giv to har your stricturs on thm!”

“Your conjctur is totally wrong, I assur you. My mind was mor
agrably ngagd. I hav bn mditating on th vry grat plasur
which a pair of fin ys in th fac of a prtty woman can bstow.”

Miss Bingly immdiatly fixd hr ys on his fac, and dsird h
would tll hr what lady had th crdit of inspiring such rflctions.
Mr. Darcy rplid, with grat intrpidity,--

“Miss lizabth Bnnt.”

“Miss lizabth Bnnt!” rpatd Miss Bingly. “I am all astonishmnt.
How long has sh bn such a favourit? and pray whn am I to wish you
joy?”

“That is xactly th qustion which I xpctd you to ask. A lady’s
imagination is vry rapid; it jumps from admiration to lov, from lov
to matrimony, in a momnt. I knw you would b wishing m joy.”

“Nay, if you ar so srious about it, I shall considr th mattr as
absolutly sttld. You will hav a charming mothr-in-law, indd, and
of cours sh will b always at Pmbrly with you.”

H listnd to hr with prfct indiffrnc, whil sh chos to
ntrtain hrslf in this mannr; and as his composur convincd hr
that all was saf, hr wit flowd along.

Mr. Bnnt’s proprty consistd almost ntirly in an stat of two
thousand a yar, which, unfortunatly for his daughtrs, was ntaild,
in dfault of hirs mal, on a distant rlation; and thir mothr’s
fortun, though ampl for hr situation in lif, could but ill supply
th dficincy of his. Hr fathr had bn an attorny in Mryton, and
had lft hr four thousand pounds.

Sh had a sistr marrid to a Mr. Philips, who had bn a clrk to thir
fathr and succdd him in th businss, and a brothr sttld in
London in a rspctabl lin of trad.

Th villag of Longbourn was only on mil from Mryton; a most
convnint distanc for th young ladis, who wr usually tmptd
thithr thr or four tims a wk, to pay thir duty to thir aunt, and
to a millinr’s shop just ovr th way. Th two youngst of th family,
Cathrin and Lydia, wr particularly frqunt in ths attntions:
thir minds wr mor vacant than thir sistrs’, and whn nothing
bttr offrd, a walk to Mryton was ncssary to amus thir morning
hours and furnish convrsation for th vning; and, howvr bar of
nws th country in gnral might b, thy always contrivd to larn
som from thir aunt. At prsnt, indd, thy wr wll supplid both
with nws and happinss by th rcnt arrival of a militia rgimnt in
th nighbourhood; it was to rmain th whol wintr, and Mryton was
th had-quartrs.

Thir visits to Mrs. Philips wr now productiv of th most intrsting
intllignc. vry day addd somthing to thir knowldg of th
officrs’ nams and connctions. Thir lodgings wr not long a scrt,
and at lngth thy bgan to know th officrs thmslvs. Mr. Philips
visitd thm all, and this opnd to his nics a sourc of flicity
unknown bfor. Thy could talk of nothing but officrs; and Mr.
Bingly’s larg fortun, th mntion of which gav animation to thir
mothr, was worthlss in thir ys whn opposd to th rgimntals of
an nsign.

Aftr listning on morning to thir ffusions on this subjct, Mr.
Bnnt coolly obsrvd,--

“From all that I can collct by your mannr of talking, you must b two
of th sillist girls in th country. I hav suspctd it som tim, but
I am now convincd.”

Cathrin was disconcrtd, and mad no answr; but Lydia, with prfct
indiffrnc, continud to xprss hr admiration of Captain Cartr, and
hr hop of sing him in th cours of th day, as h was going th
nxt morning to London.

“I am astonishd, my dar,” said Mrs. Bnnt, “that you should b so
rady to think your own childrn silly. If I wishd to think slightingly
of anybody’s childrn, it should not b of my own, howvr.”

“If my childrn ar silly, I must hop to b always snsibl of it.”

“Ys; but as it happns, thy ar all of thm vry clvr.”

“This is th only point, I flattr myslf, on which w do not agr. I
had hopd that our sntimnts coincidd in vry particular, but I must
so far diffr from you as to think our two youngst daughtrs uncommonly
foolish.”

“My dar Mr. Bnnt, you must not xpct such girls to hav th sns of
thir fathr and mothr. Whn thy gt to our ag, I dar say thy will
not think about officrs any mor than w do. I rmmbr th tim whn I
likd a rd coat myslf vry wll--and, indd, so I do still at my
hart; and if a smart young colonl, with fiv or six thousand a yar,
should want on of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonl Forstr lookd vry bcoming th othr night at Sir William’s in
his rgimntals.”

“Mamma,” crid Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonl Forstr and Captain
Cartr do not go so oftn to Miss Watson’s as thy did whn thy first
cam; sh ss thm now vry oftn standing in Clark’s library.”

Mrs. Bnnt was prvntd rplying by th ntranc of th footman with a
not for Miss Bnnt; it cam from Nthrfild, and th srvant waitd
for an answr. Mrs. Bnnt’s ys sparkld with plasur, and sh was
agrly calling out, whil hr daughtr rad,--

“Wll, Jan, who is it from? What is it about? What dos h say? Wll,
Jan, mak hast and tll us; mak hast, my lov.”

“It is from Miss Bingly,” said Jan, and thn rad it aloud.

     /* NIND “My dar frind, */

     “If you ar not so compassionat as to din to-day with Louisa and
     m, w shall b in dangr of hating ach othr for th rst of our
     livs; for a whol day’s _têt-à-têt_ btwn two womn can nvr
     nd without a quarrl. Com as soon as you can on th rcipt of
     this. My brothr and th gntlmn ar to din with th officrs.
     Yours vr,

“CAROLIN BINGLY.”

“With th officrs!” crid Lydia: “I wondr my aunt did not tll us of
_that_.”

“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bnnt; “that is vry unlucky.”

“Can I hav th carriag?” said Jan.

“No, my dar, you had bttr go on horsback, bcaus it sms likly to
rain; and thn you must stay all night.”

“That would b a good schm,” said lizabth, “if you wr sur that
thy would not offr to snd hr hom.”

“Oh, but th gntlmn will hav Mr. Bingly’s chais to go to Mryton;
and th Hursts hav no horss to thirs.”

“I had much rathr go in th coach.”

“But, my dar, your fathr cannot spar th horss, I am sur. Thy ar
wantd in th farm, Mr. Bnnt, ar not thy?”

“Thy ar wantd in th farm much oftnr than I can gt thm.”

“But if you hav got thm to-day,” said lizabth, “my mothr’s purpos
will b answrd.”

Sh did at last xtort from hr fathr an acknowldgmnt that th horss
wr ngagd; Jan was thrfor obligd to go on horsback, and hr
mothr attndd hr to th door with many chrful prognostics of a bad
day. Hr hops wr answrd; Jan had not bn gon long bfor it
raind hard. Hr sistrs wr unasy for hr, but hr mothr was
dlightd. Th rain continud th whol vning without intrmission;
Jan crtainly could not com back.

“This was a lucky ida of min, indd!” said Mrs. Bnnt, mor than
onc, as if th crdit of making it rain wr all hr own. Till th nxt
morning, howvr, sh was not awar of all th flicity of hr
contrivanc. Brakfast was scarcly ovr whn a srvant from Nthrfild
brought th following not for lizabth:--

     /* NIND “My darst Lizzi, */

     “I find myslf vry unwll this morning, which, I suppos, is to b
     imputd to my gtting wt through ystrday. My kind frinds will
     not har of my rturning hom till I am bttr. Thy insist also on
     my sing Mr. Jons--thrfor do not b alarmd if you should har
     of his having bn to m--and, xcpting a sor throat and a
     hadach, thr is not much th mattr with m.

“Yours, tc.”

“Wll, my dar,” said Mr. Bnnt, whn lizabth had rad th not
aloud, “if your daughtr should hav a dangrous fit of illnss--if sh
should di--it would b a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingly, and undr your ordrs.”

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of hr dying. Popl do not di of littl
trifling colds. Sh will b takn good car of. As long as sh stays
thr, it is all vry wll. I would go and s hr if I could hav th
carriag.”

lizabth, fling rally anxious, dtrmind to go to hr, though th
carriag was not to b had: and as sh was no horswoman, walking was
hr only altrnativ. Sh dclard hr rsolution.

“How can you b so silly,” crid hr mothr, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not b fit to b sn whn you gt
thr.”

“I shall b vry fit to s Jan--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to m, Lizzy,” said hr fathr, “to snd for th
horss?”

“No, indd. I do not wish to avoid th walk. Th distanc is nothing,
whn on has a motiv; only thr mils. I shall b back by dinnr.”

“I admir th activity of your bnvolnc,” obsrvd Mary, “but vry
impuls of fling should b guidd by rason; and, in my opinion,
xrtion should always b in proportion to what is rquird.”

“W will go as far as Mryton with you,” said Cathrin and Lydia.
lizabth accptd thir company, and th thr young ladis st off
togthr.

“If w mak hast,” said Lydia, as thy walkd along, “prhaps w may
s somthing of Captain Cartr, bfor h gos.”

In Mryton thy partd: th two youngst rpaird to th lodgings of on
of th officrs’ wivs, and lizabth continud hr walk alon, crossing
fild aftr fild at a quick pac, jumping ovr stils and springing
ovr puddls, with impatint activity, and finding hrslf at last
within viw of th hous, with wary ancls, dirty stockings, and a fac
glowing with th warmth of xrcis.

Sh was shown into th brakfast parlour, whr all but Jan wr
assmbld, and whr hr apparanc cratd a grat dal of surpris.
That sh should hav walkd thr mils so arly in th day in such
dirty wathr, and by hrslf, was almost incrdibl to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingly; and lizabth was convincd that thy hld hr in contmpt
for it. Sh was rcivd, howvr, vry politly by thm; and in thir
brothr’s mannrs thr was somthing bttr than politnss--thr was
good-humour and kindnss. Mr. Darcy said vry littl, and Mr. Hurst
nothing at all. Th formr was dividd btwn admiration of th
brilliancy which xrcis had givn to hr complxion and doubt as to
th occasion’s justifying hr coming so far alon. Th lattr was
thinking only of his brakfast.

Hr inquiris aftr hr sistr wr not vry favourably answrd. Miss
Bnnt had slpt ill, and though up, was vry fvrish, and not wll
nough to lav hr room. lizabth was glad to b takn to hr
immdiatly; and Jan, who had only bn withhld by th far of giving
alarm or inconvninc, from xprssing in hr not how much sh longd
for such a visit, was dlightd at hr ntranc. Sh was not qual,
howvr, to much convrsation; and whn Miss Bingly lft thm togthr,
could attmpt littl bsid xprssions of gratitud for th
xtraordinary kindnss sh was tratd with. lizabth silntly attndd
hr.

Whn brakfast was ovr, thy wr joind by th sistrs; and lizabth
bgan to lik thm hrslf, whn sh saw how much affction and
solicitud thy showd for Jan. Th apothcary cam; and having
xamind his patint, said, as might b supposd, that sh had caught a
violnt cold, and that thy must ndavour to gt th bttr of it;
advisd hr to rturn to bd, and promisd hr som draughts. Th advic
was followd radily, for th fvrish symptoms incrasd, and hr had
achd acutly. lizabth did not quit hr room for a momnt, nor wr
th othr ladis oftn absnt; th gntlmn bing out, thy had in fact
nothing to do lswhr.

Whn th clock struck thr, lizabth flt that sh must go, and vry
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingly offrd hr th carriag, and sh only
wantd a littl prssing to accpt it, whn Jan tstifid such concrn
at parting with hr that Miss Bingly was obligd to convrt th offr
of th chais into an invitation to rmain at Nthrfild for th
prsnt. lizabth most thankfully consntd, and a srvant was
dspatchd to Longbourn, to acquaint th family with hr stay, and bring
back a supply of cloths.

At fiv o’clock th two ladis rtird to drss, and at half-past six
lizabth was summond to dinnr. To th civil inquiris which thn
pourd in, and amongst which sh had th plasur of distinguishing th
much suprior solicitud of Mr. Bingly, sh could not mak a vry
favourabl answr. Jan was by no mans bttr. Th sistrs, on haring
this, rpatd thr or four tims how much thy wr grivd, how
shocking it was to hav a bad cold, and how xcssivly thy dislikd
bing ill thmslvs; and thn thought no mor of th mattr: and thir
indiffrnc towards Jan, whn not immdiatly bfor thm, rstord
lizabth to th njoymnt of all hr original dislik.

Thir brothr, indd, was th only on of th party whom sh could
rgard with any complacncy. His anxity for Jan was vidnt, and his
attntions to hrslf most plasing; and thy prvntd hr fling
hrslf so much an intrudr as sh blivd sh was considrd by th
othrs. Sh had vry littl notic from any but him. Miss Bingly was
ngrossd by Mr. Darcy, hr sistr scarcly lss so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom lizabth sat, h was an indolnt man, who livd only to
at, drink, and play at cards, who, whn h found hr prfr a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to hr.

Whn dinnr was ovr, sh rturnd dirctly to Jan, and Miss Bingly
bgan abusing hr as soon as sh was out of th room. Hr mannrs wr
pronouncd to b vry bad indd,--a mixtur of prid and imprtinnc:
sh had no convrsation, no styl, no tast, no bauty. Mrs. Hurst
thought th sam, and addd,--

“Sh has nothing, in short, to rcommnd hr, but bing an xcllnt
walkr. I shall nvr forgt hr apparanc this morning. Sh rally
lookd almost wild.”

“Sh did indd, Louisa. I could hardly kp my countnanc. Vry
nonsnsical to com at all! Why must _sh_ b scampring about th
country, bcaus hr sistr had a cold? Hr hair so untidy, so blowzy!”

“Ys, and hr ptticoat; I hop you saw hr ptticoat, six inchs dp
in mud, I am absolutly crtain, and th gown which had bn lt down to
hid it not doing its offic.”

“Your pictur may b vry xact, Louisa,” said Bingly; “but this was
all lost upon m. I thought Miss lizabth Bnnt lookd rmarkably wll
whn sh cam into th room this morning. Hr dirty ptticoat quit
scapd my notic.”

“_You_ obsrvd it, Mr. Darcy, I am sur,” said Miss Bingly; “and I am
inclind to think that you would not wish to s _your sistr_ mak such
an xhibition.”

“Crtainly not.”

“To walk thr mils, or four mils, or fiv mils, or whatvr it is,
abov hr ancls in dirt, and alon, quit alon! what could sh man by
it? It sms to m to show an abominabl sort of concitd indpndnc,
a most country-town indiffrnc to dcorum.”

“It shows an affction for hr sistr that is vry plasing,” said
Bingly.

“I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,” obsrvd Miss Bingly, in a half whispr,
“that this advntur has rathr affctd your admiration of hr fin
ys.”

“Not at all,” h rplid: “thy wr brightnd by th xrcis.” A
short paus followd this spch, and Mrs. Hurst bgan again,--

“I hav an xcssiv rgard for Jan Bnnt,--sh is rally a vry swt
girl,--and I wish with all my hart sh wr wll sttld. But with such
a fathr and mothr, and such low connctions, I am afraid thr is no
chanc of it.”

“I think I hav hard you say that thir uncl is an attorny in
Mryton?”

“Ys; and thy hav anothr, who livs somwhr nar Chapsid.”

“That is capital,” addd hr sistr; and thy both laughd hartily.

“If thy had uncls nough to fill _all_ Chapsid,” crid Bingly, “it
would not mak thm on jot lss agrabl.”

“But it must vry matrially lssn thir chanc of marrying mn of any
considration in th world,” rplid Darcy.

To this spch Bingly mad no answr; but his sistrs gav it thir
harty assnt, and indulgd thir mirth for som tim at th xpns of
thir dar frind’s vulgar rlations.

With a rnwal of tndrnss, howvr, thy rpaird to hr room on
laving th dining-parlour, and sat with hr till summond to coff.
Sh was still vry poorly, and lizabth would not quit hr at all, till
lat in th vning, whn sh had th comfort of sing hr aslp, and
whn it appard to hr rathr right than plasant that sh should go
down stairs hrslf. On ntring th drawing-room, sh found th whol
party at loo, and was immdiatly invitd to join thm; but suspcting
thm to b playing high, sh dclind it, and making hr sistr th
xcus, said sh would amus hrslf, for th short tim sh could stay
blow, with a book. Mr. Hurst lookd at hr with astonishmnt.

“Do you prfr rading to cards?” said h; “that is rathr singular.”

“Miss liza Bnnt,” said Miss Bingly, “dspiss cards. Sh is a grat
radr, and has no plasur in anything ls.”

“I dsrv nithr such prais nor such cnsur,” crid lizabth; “I
am _not_ a grat radr, and I hav plasur in many things.”

“In nursing your sistr I am sur you hav plasur,” said Bingly; “and
I hop it will soon b incrasd by sing hr quit wll.”

lizabth thankd him from hr hart, and thn walkd towards a tabl
whr a fw books wr lying. H immdiatly offrd to ftch hr
othrs; all that his library affordd.

“And I wish my collction wr largr for your bnfit and my own
crdit; but I am an idl fllow; and though I hav not many, I hav mor
than I vr lookd into.”

lizabth assurd him that sh could suit hrslf prfctly with thos
in th room.

“I am astonishd,” said Miss Bingly, “that my fathr should hav lft
so small a collction of books. What a dlightful library you hav at
Pmbrly, Mr. Darcy!”

“It ought to b good,” h rplid: “it has bn th work of many
gnrations.”

“And thn you hav addd so much to it yourslf--you ar always buying
books.”

“I cannot comprhnd th nglct of a family library in such days as
ths.”

“Nglct! I am sur you nglct nothing that can add to th bautis of
that nobl plac. Charls, whn you build _your_ hous, I wish it may b
half as dlightful as Pmbrly.”

“I wish it may.”

“But I would rally advis you to mak your purchas in that
nighbourhood, and tak Pmbrly for a kind of modl. Thr is not a
finr county in ngland than Drbyshir.”

“With all my hart: I will buy Pmbrly itslf, if Darcy will sll it.”

“I am talking of possibilitis, Charls.”

“Upon my word, Carolin, I should think it mor possibl to gt
Pmbrly by purchas than by imitation.”

lizabth was so much caught by what passd, as to lav hr vry littl
attntion for hr book; and, soon laying it wholly asid, sh drw nar
th card-tabl, and stationd hrslf btwn Mr. Bingly and his ldst
sistr, to obsrv th gam.

“Is Miss Darcy much grown sinc th spring?” said Miss Bingly: “will
sh b as tall as I am?”

“I think sh will. Sh is now about Miss lizabth Bnnt’s hight, or
rathr tallr.”

“How I long to s hr again! I nvr mt with anybody who dlightd m
so much. Such a countnanc, such mannrs, and so xtrmly accomplishd
for hr ag! Hr prformanc on th pianofort is xquisit.”

“It is amazing to m,” said Bingly, “how young ladis can hav patinc
to b so vry accomplishd as thy all ar.”

“All young ladis accomplishd! My dar Charls, what do you man?”

“Ys, all of thm, I think. Thy all paint tabls, covr scrns, and
nt purss. I scarcly know any on who cannot do all this; and I am
sur I nvr hard a young lady spokn of for th first tim, without
bing informd that sh was vry accomplishd.”

“Your list of th common xtnt of accomplishmnts,” said Darcy, “has
too much truth. Th word is applid to many a woman who dsrvs it no
othrwis than by ntting a purs or covring a scrn; but I am vry
far from agring with you in your stimation of ladis in gnral. I
cannot boast of knowing mor than half-a-dozn in th whol rang of my
acquaintanc that ar rally accomplishd.”

“Nor I, I am sur,” said Miss Bingly.

“Thn,” obsrvd lizabth, “you must comprhnd a grat dal in your
ida of an accomplishd woman.”

“Ys; I do comprhnd a grat dal in it.”

“Oh, crtainly,” crid his faithful assistant, “no on can b rally
stmd accomplishd who dos not gratly surpass what is usually mt
with. A woman must hav a thorough knowldg of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and th modrn languags, to dsrv th word; and, bsids all
this, sh must possss a crtain somthing in hr air and mannr of
walking, th ton of hr voic, hr addrss and xprssions, or th word
will b but half dsrvd.”

“All this sh must possss,” addd Darcy; “and to all sh must yt add
somthing mor substantial in th improvmnt of hr mind by xtnsiv
rading.”

“I am no longr surprisd at your knowing _only_ six accomplishd womn.
I rathr wondr now at your knowing _any_.”

“Ar you so svr upon your own sx as to doubt th possibility of all
this?”

“_I_ nvr saw such a woman. _I_ nvr saw such capacity, and tast, and
application, and lganc, as you dscrib, unitd.”

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingly both crid out against th injustic of hr
implid doubt, and wr both protsting that thy knw many womn who
answrd this dscription, whn Mr. Hurst calld thm to ordr, with
bittr complaints of thir inattntion to what was going forward. As all
convrsation was thrby at an nd, lizabth soon aftrwards lft th
room.

“liza Bnnt,” said Miss Bingly, whn th door was closd on hr, “is
on of thos young ladis who sk to rcommnd thmslvs to th othr
sx by undrvaluing thir own; and with many mn, I darsay, it
succds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry dvic, a vry man art.”

“Undoubtdly,” rplid Darcy, to whom this rmark was chifly addrssd,
“thr is mannss in _all_ th arts which ladis somtims condscnd
to mploy for captivation. Whatvr bars affinity to cunning is
dspicabl.”

Miss Bingly was not so ntirly satisfid with this rply as to
continu th subjct.

lizabth joind thm again only to say that hr sistr was wors, and
that sh could not lav hr. Bingly urgd Mr. Jons’s bing snt for
immdiatly; whil his sistrs, convincd that no country advic could
b of any srvic, rcommndd an xprss to town for on of th most
minnt physicians. This sh would not har of; but sh was not so
unwilling to comply with thir brothr’s proposal; and it was sttld
that Mr. Jons should b snt for arly in th morning, if Miss Bnnt
wr not dciddly bttr. Bingly was quit uncomfortabl; his sistrs
dclard that thy wr misrabl. Thy solacd thir wrtchdnss,
howvr, by duts aftr suppr; whil h could find no bttr rlif to
his flings than by giving his houskpr dirctions that vry
possibl attntion might b paid to th sick lady and hr sistr.

lizabth passd th chif of th night in hr sistr’s room, and in th
morning had th plasur of bing abl to snd a tolrabl answr to th
inquiris which sh vry arly rcivd from Mr. Bingly by a housmaid,
and som tim aftrwards from th two lgant ladis who waitd on his
sistrs. In spit of this amndmnt, howvr, sh rqustd to hav a
not snt to Longbourn, dsiring hr mothr to visit Jan, and form hr
own judgmnt of hr situation. Th not was immdiatly dspatchd, and
its contnts as quickly complid with. Mrs. Bnnt, accompanid by hr
two youngst girls, rachd Nthrfild soon aftr th family brakfast.

Had sh found Jan in any apparnt dangr, Mrs. Bnnt would hav bn
vry misrabl; but bing satisfid on sing hr that hr illnss was
not alarming, sh had no wish of hr rcovring immdiatly, as hr
rstoration to halth would probably rmov hr from Nthrfild. Sh
would not listn, thrfor, to hr daughtr’s proposal of bing carrid
hom; nithr did th apothcary, who arrivd about th sam tim, think
it at all advisabl. Aftr sitting a littl whil with Jan, on Miss
Bingly’s apparanc and invitation, th mothr and thr daughtrs all
attndd hr into th brakfast parlour. Bingly mt thm with hops
that Mrs. Bnnt had not found Miss Bnnt wors than sh xpctd.

“Indd I hav, sir,” was hr answr. “Sh is a grat dal too ill to b
movd. Mr. Jons says w must not think of moving hr. W must trspass
a littl longr on your kindnss.”

“Rmovd!” crid Bingly. “It must not b thought of. My sistr, I am
sur, will not har of hr rmoval.”

“You may dpnd upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingly, with cold civility,
“that Miss Bnnt shall rciv vry possibl attntion whil sh
rmains with us.”

Mrs. Bnnt was profus in hr acknowldgmnts.

“I am sur,” sh addd, “if it was not for such good frinds, I do not
know what would bcom of hr, for sh is vry ill indd, and suffrs a
vast dal, though with th gratst patinc in th world, which is
always th way with hr, for sh has, without xcption, th swtst
tmpr I vr mt with. I oftn tll my othr girls thy ar nothing to
_hr_. You hav a swt room hr, Mr. Bingly, and a charming prospct
ovr that gravl walk. I do not know a plac in th country that is
qual to Nthrfild. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
hop, though you hav but a short las.”

“Whatvr I do is don in a hurry,” rplid h; “and thrfor if I
should rsolv to quit Nthrfild, I should probably b off in fiv
minuts. At prsnt, howvr, I considr myslf as quit fixd hr.”

“That is xactly what I should hav supposd of you,” said lizabth.

“You bgin to comprhnd m, do you?” crid h, turning towards hr.

“Oh ys--I undrstand you prfctly.”

“I wish I might tak this for a complimnt; but to b so asily sn
through, I am afraid, is pitiful.”

“That is as it happns. It dos not ncssarily follow that a dp,
intricat charactr is mor or lss stimabl than such a on as yours.”

“Lizzy,” crid hr mothr, “rmmbr whr you ar, and do not run on in
th wild mannr that you ar suffrd to do at hom.”

“I did not know bfor,” continud Bingly, immdiatly, “that you wr
a studir of charactr. It must b an amusing study.”

“Ys; but intricat charactrs ar th _most_ amusing. Thy hav at
last that advantag.”

“Th country,” said Darcy, “can in gnral supply but fw subjcts for
such a study. In a country nighbourhood you mov in a vry confind and
unvarying socity.”

“But popl thmslvs altr so much, that thr is somthing nw to b
obsrvd in thm for vr.”

“Ys, indd,” crid Mrs. Bnnt, offndd by his mannr of mntioning a
country nighbourhood. “I assur you thr is quit as much of _that_
going on in th country as in town.”

vrybody was surprisd; and Darcy, aftr looking at hr for a momnt,
turnd silntly away. Mrs. Bnnt, who fancid sh had gaind a complt
victory ovr him, continud hr triumph,--

“I cannot s that London has any grat advantag ovr th country, for
my part, xcpt th shops and public placs. Th country is a vast dal
plasantr, is not it, Mr. Bingly?”

“Whn I am in th country,” h rplid, “I nvr wish to lav it; and
whn I am in town, it is prtty much th sam. Thy hav ach thir
advantags, and I can b qually happy in ithr.”

“Ay, that is bcaus you hav th right disposition. But that
gntlman,” looking at Darcy, “smd to think th country was nothing
at all.”

“Indd, mamma, you ar mistakn,” said lizabth, blushing for hr
mothr. “You quit mistook Mr. Darcy. H only mant that thr was not
such a varity of popl to b mt with in th country as in town, which
you must acknowldg to b tru.”

“Crtainly, my dar, nobody said thr wr; but as to not mting with
many popl in this nighbourhood, I bliv thr ar fw
nighbourhoods largr. I know w din with four-and-twnty familis.”

Nothing but concrn for lizabth could nabl Bingly to kp his
countnanc. His sistr was lss dlicat, and dirctd hr y towards
Mr. Darcy with a vry xprssiv smil. lizabth, for th sak of
saying somthing that might turn hr mothr’s thoughts, now askd hr if
Charlott Lucas had bn at Longbourn sinc _hr_ coming away.

“Ys, sh calld ystrday with hr fathr. What an agrabl man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingly--is not h? so much th man of fashion! so
gntl and so asy! H has always somthing to say to vrybody. _That_
is my ida of good brding; and thos prsons who fancy thmslvs vry
important and nvr opn thir mouths quit mistak th mattr.”

“Did Charlott din with you?”

“No, sh would go hom. I fancy sh was wantd about th minc-pis. For
my part, Mr. Bingly, _I_ always kp srvants that can do thir own
work; _my_ daughtrs ar brought up diffrntly. But vrybody is to
judg for thmslvs, and th Lucass ar a vry good sort of girls, I
assur you. It is a pity thy ar not handsom! Not that _I_ think
Charlott so _vry_ plain; but thn sh is our particular frind.”

“Sh sms a vry plasant young woman,” said Bingly.

“Oh dar, ys; but you must own sh is vry plain. Lady Lucas hrslf
has oftn said so, and nvid m Jan’s bauty. I do not lik to boast
of my own child; but to b sur, Jan--on dos not oftn s anybody
bttr looking. It is what vrybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. Whn sh was only fiftn thr was a gntlman at my
brothr Gardinr’s in town so much in lov with hr, that my
sistr-in-law was sur h would mak hr an offr bfor w cam away.
But, howvr, h did not. Prhaps h thought hr too young. Howvr, h
wrot som vrss on hr, and vry prtty thy wr.”

“And so ndd his affction,” said lizabth, impatintly. “Thr has
bn many a on, I fancy, ovrcom in th sam way. I wondr who first
discovrd th fficacy of potry in driving away lov!”

“I hav bn usd to considr potry as th _food_ of lov,” said Darcy.

“Of a fin, stout, halthy lov it may. vrything nourishs what is
strong alrady. But if it b only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convincd that on good sonnt will starv it ntirly away.”

Darcy only smild; and th gnral paus which nsud mad lizabth
trmbl lst hr mothr should b xposing hrslf again. Sh longd to
spak, but could think of nothing to say; and aftr a short silnc Mrs.
Bnnt bgan rpating hr thanks to Mr. Bingly for his kindnss to
Jan, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingly was
unaffctdly civil in his answr, and forcd his youngr sistr to b
civil also, and say what th occasion rquird. Sh prformd hr part,
indd, without much graciousnss, but Mrs. Bnnt was satisfid, and
soon aftrwards ordrd hr carriag. Upon this signal, th youngst of
hr daughtrs put hrslf forward. Th two girls had bn whispring to
ach othr during th whol visit; and th rsult of it was, that th
youngst should tax Mr. Bingly with having promisd on his first coming
into th country to giv a ball at Nthrfild.

Lydia was a stout, wll-grown girl of fiftn, with a fin complxion
and good-humourd countnanc; a favourit with hr mothr, whos
affction had brought hr into public at an arly ag. Sh had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural slf-consqunc, which th
attntions of th officrs, to whom hr uncl’s good dinnrs and hr
own asy mannrs rcommndd hr, had incrasd into assuranc. Sh was
vry qual, thrfor, to addrss Mr. Bingly on th subjct of th
ball, and abruptly rmindd him of his promis; adding, that it would b
th most shamful thing in th world if h did not kp it. His answr
to this suddn attack was dlightful to hr mothr’s ar.

“I am prfctly rady, I assur you, to kp my ngagmnt; and, whn
your sistr is rcovrd, you shall, if you plas, nam th vry day of
th ball. But you would not wish to b dancing whil sh is ill?”

Lydia dclard hrslf satisfid. “Oh ys--it would b much bttr to
wait till Jan was wll; and by that tim, most likly, Captain Cartr
would b at Mryton again. And whn you hav givn _your_ ball,” sh
addd, “I shall insist on thir giving on also. I shall tll Colonl
Forstr it will b quit a sham if h dos not.”

Mrs. Bnnt and hr daughtrs thn dpartd, and lizabth rturnd
instantly to Jan, laving hr own and hr rlations’ bhaviour to th
rmarks of th two ladis and Mr. Darcy; th lattr of whom, howvr,
could not b prvaild on to join in thir cnsur of _hr_, in spit of
all Miss Bingly’s witticisms on _fin ys_.

Th day passd much as th day bfor had don. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingly had spnt som hours of th morning with th invalid, who
continud, though slowly, to mnd; and, in th vning, lizabth joind
thir party in th drawing-room. Th loo tabl, howvr, did not appar.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingly, satd nar him, was watching
th progrss of his lttr, and rpatdly calling off his attntion by
mssags to his sistr. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingly wr at piqut, and
Mrs. Hurst was obsrving thir gam.

lizabth took up som ndlwork, and was sufficintly amusd in
attnding to what passd btwn Darcy and his companion. Th prptual
commndations of th lady ithr on his hand-writing, or on th vnnss
of his lins, or on th lngth of his lttr, with th prfct unconcrn
with which hr praiss wr rcivd, formd a curious dialogu, and was
xactly in unison with hr opinion of ach.

“How dlightd Miss Darcy will b to rciv such a lttr!”

H mad no answr.

“You writ uncommonly fast.”

“You ar mistakn. I writ rathr slowly.”

“How many lttrs you must hav occasion to writ in th cours of a
yar! Lttrs of businss, too! How odious I should think thm!”

“It is fortunat, thn, that thy fall to my lot instad of to yours.”

“Pray tll your sistr that I long to s hr.”

“I hav alrady told hr so onc, by your dsir.”

“I am afraid you do not lik your pn. Lt m mnd it for you. I mnd
pns rmarkably wll.”

“Thank you--but I always mnd my own.”

“How can you contriv to writ so vn?”

H was silnt.

“Tll your sistr I am dlightd to har of hr improvmnt on th harp,
and pray lt hr know that I am quit in rapturs with hr bautiful
littl dsign for a tabl, and I think it infinitly suprior to Miss
Grantly’s.”

“Will you giv m lav to dfr your rapturs till I writ again? At
prsnt I hav not room to do thm justic.”

“Oh, it is of no consqunc. I shall s hr in January. But do you
always writ such charming long lttrs to hr, Mr. Darcy?”

“Thy ar gnrally long; but whthr always charming, it is not for m
to dtrmin.”

“It is a rul with m, that a prson who can writ a long lttr with
as cannot writ ill.”

“That will not do for a complimnt to Darcy, Carolin,” crid hr
brothr, “bcaus h dos _not_ writ with as. H studis too much
for words of four syllabls. Do not you, Darcy?”

“My styl of writing is vry diffrnt from yours.”

“Oh,” crid Miss Bingly, “Charls writs in th most carlss way
imaginabl. H lavs out half his words, and blots th rst.”

“My idas flow so rapidly that I hav not tim to xprss thm; by which
mans my lttrs somtims convy no idas at all to my corrspondnts.”

“Your humility, Mr. Bingly,” said lizabth, “must disarm rproof.”

“Nothing is mor dcitful,” said Darcy, “than th apparanc of
humility. It is oftn only carlssnss of opinion, and somtims an
indirct boast.”

“And which of th two do you call _my_ littl rcnt pic of modsty?”

“Th indirct boast; for you ar rally proud of your dfcts in
writing, bcaus you considr thm as procding from a rapidity of
thought and carlssnss of xcution, which, if not stimabl, you
think at last highly intrsting. Th powr of doing anything with
quicknss is always much prizd by th possssor, and oftn without any
attntion to th imprfction of th prformanc. Whn you told Mrs.
Bnnt this morning, that if you vr rsolvd on quitting Nthrfild
you should b gon in fiv minuts, you mant it to b a sort of
pangyric, of complimnt to yourslf; and yt what is thr so vry
laudabl in a prcipitanc which must lav vry ncssary businss
undon, and can b of no ral advantag to yourslf or anyon ls?”

“Nay,” crid Bingly, “this is too much, to rmmbr at night all th
foolish things that wr said in th morning. And yt, upon my honour, I
blivd what I said of myslf to b tru, and I bliv it at this
momnt. At last, thrfor, I did not assum th charactr of ndlss
prcipitanc mrly to show off bfor th ladis.”

“I darsay you blivd it; but I am by no mans convincd that you
would b gon with such clrity. Your conduct would b quit as
dpndnt on chanc as that of any man I know; and if, as you wr
mounting your hors, a frind wr to say, ‘Bingly, you had bttr stay
till nxt wk,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not
go--and, at anothr word, might stay a month.”

“You hav only provd by this,” crid lizabth, “that Mr. Bingly did
not do justic to his own disposition. You hav shown him off now much
mor than h did himslf.”

“I am xcdingly gratifid,” said Bingly, “by your convrting what my
frind says into a complimnt on th swtnss of my tmpr. But I am
afraid you ar giving it a turn which that gntlman did by no mans
intnd; for h would crtainly think th bttr of m if, undr such a
circumstanc, I wr to giv a flat dnial, and rid off as fast as I
could.”

“Would Mr. Darcy thn considr th rashnss of your original intntion
as atond for by your obstinacy in adhring to it?”

“Upon my word, I cannot xactly xplain th mattr--Darcy must spak for
himslf.”

“You xpct m to account for opinions which you choos to call min,
but which I hav nvr acknowldgd. Allowing th cas, howvr, to
stand according to your rprsntation, you must rmmbr, Miss Bnnt,
that th frind who is supposd to dsir his rturn to th hous, and
th dlay of his plan, has mrly dsird it, askd it without offring
on argumnt in favour of its proprity.”

“To yild radily--asily--to th _prsuasion_ of a frind is no mrit
with you.”

“To yild without conviction is no complimnt to th undrstanding of
ithr.”

“You appar to m, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for th influnc of
frindship and affction. A rgard for th rqustr would oftn mak
on radily yild to a rqust, without waiting for argumnts to rason
on into it. I am not particularly spaking of such a cas as you hav
supposd about Mr. Bingly. W may as wll wait, prhaps, till th
circumstanc occurs, bfor w discuss th discrtion of his bhaviour
thrupon. But in gnral and ordinary cass, btwn frind and frind,
whr on of thm is dsird by th othr to chang a rsolution of no
vry grat momnt, should you think ill of that prson for complying
with th dsir, without waiting to b argud into it?”

“Will it not b advisabl, bfor w procd on this subjct, to arrang
with rathr mor prcision th dgr of importanc which is to
apprtain to this rqust, as wll as th dgr of intimacy subsisting
btwn th partis?”

“By all mans,” crid Bingly; “lt us har all th particulars, not
forgtting thir comparativ hight and siz, for that will hav mor
wight in th argumnt, Miss Bnnt, than you may b awar of. I assur
you that if Darcy wr not such a grat tall fllow, in comparison with
myslf, I should not pay him half so much dfrnc. I dclar I do not
know a mor awful objct than Darcy on particular occasions, and in
particular placs; at his own hous spcially, and of a Sunday vning,
whn h has nothing to do.”

Mr. Darcy smild; but lizabth thought sh could prciv that h was
rathr offndd, and thrfor chckd hr laugh. Miss Bingly warmly
rsntd th indignity h had rcivd, in an xpostulation with hr
brothr for talking such nonsns.

“I s your dsign, Bingly,” said his frind. “You dislik an argumnt,
and want to silnc this.”

“Prhaps I do. Argumnts ar too much lik disputs. If you and Miss
Bnnt will dfr yours till I am out of th room, I shall b vry
thankful; and thn you may say whatvr you lik of m.”

“What you ask,” said lizabth, “is no sacrific on my sid; and Mr.
Darcy had much bttr finish his lttr.”

Mr. Darcy took hr advic, and did finish his lttr.

Whn that businss was ovr, h applid to Miss Bingly and lizabth
for th indulgnc of som music. Miss Bingly movd with alacrity to
th pianofort, and aftr a polit rqust that lizabth would lad th
way, which th othr as politly and mor arnstly ngativd, sh
satd hrslf.

Mrs. Hurst sang with hr sistr; and whil thy wr thus mployd,
lizabth could not hlp obsrving, as sh turnd ovr som music-books
that lay on th instrumnt, how frquntly Mr. Darcy’s ys wr fixd
on hr. Sh hardly knw how to suppos that sh could b an objct of
admiration to so grat a man, and yt that h should look at hr bcaus
h dislikd hr was still mor strang. Sh could only imagin, howvr,
at last, that sh drw his notic bcaus thr was somthing about hr
mor wrong and rprhnsibl, according to his idas of right, than in
any othr prson prsnt. Th supposition did not pain hr. Sh likd
him too littl to car for his approbation.

Aftr playing som Italian songs, Miss Bingly varid th charm by a
livly Scotch air; and soon aftrwards Mr. Darcy, drawing nar
lizabth, said to hr,--

“Do you not fl a grat inclination, Miss Bnnt, to siz such an
opportunity of dancing a rl?”

Sh smild, but mad no answr. H rpatd th qustion, with som
surpris at hr silnc.

“Oh,” said sh, “I hard you bfor; but I could not immdiatly
dtrmin what to say in rply. You wantd m, I know, to say ‘Ys,’
that you might hav th plasur of dspising my tast; but I always
dlight in ovrthrowing thos kind of schms, and chating a prson of
thir prmditatd contmpt. I hav, thrfor, mad up my mind to tll
you that I do not want to danc a rl at all; and now dspis m if you
dar.”

“Indd I do not dar.”

lizabth, having rathr xpctd to affront him, was amazd at his
gallantry; but thr was a mixtur of swtnss and archnss in hr
mannr which mad it difficult for hr to affront anybody, and Darcy had
nvr bn so bwitchd by any woman as h was by hr. H rally
blivd that, wr it not for th infriority of hr connctions, h
should b in som dangr.

Miss Bingly saw, or suspctd, nough to b jalous; and hr grat
anxity for th rcovry of hr dar frind Jan rcivd som
assistanc from hr dsir of gtting rid of lizabth.

Sh oftn trid to provok Darcy into disliking hr gust, by talking of
thir supposd marriag, and planning his happinss in such an allianc.

“I hop,” said sh, as thy wr walking togthr in th shrubbry th
nxt day, “you will giv your mothr-in-law a fw hints, whn this
dsirabl vnt taks plac, as to th advantag of holding hr tongu;
and if you can compass it, to cur th youngr girls of running aftr
th officrs. And, if I may mntion so dlicat a subjct, ndavour to
chck that littl somthing, bordring on concit and imprtinnc,
which your lady posssss.”

“Hav you anything ls to propos for my domstic flicity?”

“Oh ys. Do lt th portraits of your uncl and aunt Philips b placd
in th gallry at Pmbrly. Put thm nxt to your grat-uncl th
judg. Thy ar in th sam profssion, you know, only in diffrnt
lins. As for your lizabth’s pictur, you must not attmpt to hav it
takn, for what paintr could do justic to thos bautiful ys?”

“It would not b asy, indd, to catch thir xprssion; but thir
colour and shap, and th ylashs, so rmarkably fin, might b
copid.”

At that momnt thy wr mt from anothr walk by Mrs. Hurst and
lizabth hrslf.

“I did not know that you intndd to walk,” said Miss Bingly, in som
confusion, lst thy had bn ovrhard.

“You usd us abominably ill,” answrd Mrs. Hurst, “running away without
tlling us that you wr coming out.”

Thn taking th disngagd arm of Mr. Darcy, sh lft lizabth to walk
by hrslf. Th path just admittd thr. Mr. Darcy flt thir rudnss,
and immdiatly said,--

“This walk is not wid nough for our party. W had bttr go into th
avnu.”

But lizabth, who had not th last inclination to rmain with thm,
laughingly answrd,--

“No, no; stay whr you ar. You ar charmingly groupd, and appar to
uncommon advantag. Th pictursqu would b spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-by.”

Sh thn ran gaily off, rjoicing, as sh rambld about, in th hop of
bing at hom again in a day or two. Jan was alrady so much rcovrd
as to intnd laving hr room for a coupl of hours that vning.

Whn th ladis rmovd aftr dinnr lizabth ran up to hr sistr, and
sing hr wll guardd from cold, attndd hr into th drawing-room,
whr sh was wlcomd by hr two frinds with many profssions of
plasur; and lizabth had nvr sn thm so agrabl as thy wr
during th hour which passd bfor th gntlmn appard. Thir powrs
of convrsation wr considrabl. Thy could dscrib an ntrtainmnt
with accuracy, rlat an ancdot with humour, and laugh at thir
acquaintanc with spirit.

But whn th gntlmn ntrd, Jan was no longr th first objct;
Miss Bingly’s ys wr instantly turnd towards Darcy, and sh had
somthing to say to him bfor h had advancd many stps. H addrssd
himslf dirctly to Miss Bnnt with a polit congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also mad hr a slight bow, and said h was “vry glad;” but diffusnss
and warmth rmaind for Bingly’s salutation. H was full of joy and
attntion. Th first half hour was spnt in piling up th fir, lst sh
should suffr from th chang of room; and sh rmovd, at his dsir,
to th othr sid of th firplac, that sh might b farthr from th
door. H thn sat down by hr, and talkd scarcly to anyon ls.
lizabth, at work in th opposit cornr, saw it all with grat
dlight.

Whn ta was ovr Mr. Hurst rmindd his sistr-in-law of th
card-tabl--but in vain. Sh had obtaind privat intllignc that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. Hurst soon found vn his opn
ptition rjctd. Sh assurd him that no on intndd to play, and th
silnc of th whol party on th subjct smd to justify hr. Mr.
Hurst had, thrfor, nothing to do but to strtch himslf on on of th
sofas and go to slp. Darcy took up a book. Miss Bingly did th sam;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupid in playing with hr braclts and
rings, joind now and thn in hr brothr’s convrsation with Miss
Bnnt.

Miss Bingly’s attntion was quit as much ngagd in watching Mr.
Darcy’s progrss through _his_ book, as in rading hr own; and sh was
prptually ithr making som inquiry, or looking at his pag. Sh
could not win him, howvr, to any convrsation; h mrly answrd hr
qustion and rad on. At lngth, quit xhaustd by th attmpt to b
amusd with hr own book, which sh had only chosn bcaus it was th
scond volum of his, sh gav a grat yawn and said, “How plasant it
is to spnd an vning in this way! I dclar, aftr all, thr is no
njoymnt lik rading! How much soonr on tirs of anything than of a
book! Whn I hav a hous of my own, I shall b misrabl if I hav not
an xcllnt library.”

No on mad any rply. Sh thn yawnd again, thrw asid hr book, and
cast hr ys round th room in qust of som amusmnt; whn, haring
hr brothr mntioning a ball to Miss Bnnt, sh turnd suddnly
towards him and said,--

“By th by Charls, ar you rally srious in mditating a danc at
Nthrfild? I would advis you, bfor you dtrmin on it, to consult
th wishs of th prsnt party; I am much mistakn if thr ar not
som among us to whom a ball would b rathr a punishmnt than a
plasur.”

“If you man Darcy,” crid hr brothr, “h may go to bd, if h
chooss, bfor it bgins; but as for th ball, it is quit a sttld
thing, and as soon as Nicholls has mad whit soup nough I shall snd
round my cards.”

“I should lik balls infinitly bttr,” sh rplid, “if thy wr
carrid on in a diffrnt mannr; but thr is somthing insuffrably
tdious in th usual procss of such a mting. It would surly b much
mor rational if convrsation instad of dancing mad th ordr of th
day.”

“Much mor rational, my dar Carolin, I dar say; but it would not b
nar so much lik a ball.”

Miss Bingly mad no answr, and soon aftrwards got up and walkd about
th room. Hr figur was lgant, and sh walkd wll; but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimd, was still inflxibly studious. In th
dspration of hr flings, sh rsolvd on on ffort mor; and,
turning to lizabth, said,--

“Miss liza Bnnt, lt m prsuad you to follow my xampl, and tak a
turn about th room. I assur you it is vry rfrshing aftr sitting so
long in on attitud.”

lizabth was surprisd, but agrd to it immdiatly. Miss Bingly
succdd no lss in th ral objct of hr civility: Mr. Darcy lookd
up. H was as much awak to th novlty of attntion in that quartr as
lizabth hrslf could b, and unconsciously closd his book. H was
dirctly invitd to join thir party, but h dclind it, obsrving that
h could imagin but two motivs for thir choosing to walk up and down
th room togthr, with ithr of which motivs his joining thm would
intrfr. What could h man? Sh was dying to know what could b his
maning--and askd lizabth whthr sh could at all undrstand him.

“Not at all,” was hr answr; “but, dpnd upon it, h mans to b
svr on us, and our surst way of disappointing him will b to ask
nothing about it.”

Miss Bingly, howvr, was incapabl of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and prsvrd, thrfor, in rquiring an xplanation of his
two motivs.

“I hav not th smallst objction to xplaining thm,” said h, as soon
as sh allowd him to spak. “You ithr choos this mthod of passing
th vning bcaus you ar in ach othr’s confidnc, and hav scrt
affairs to discuss, or bcaus you ar conscious that your figurs
appar to th gratst advantag in walking: if th first, I should b
compltly in your way; and if th scond, I can admir you much bttr
as I sit by th fir.”

“Oh, shocking!” crid Miss Bingly. “I nvr hard anything so
abominabl. How shall w punish him for such a spch?”

“Nothing so asy, if you hav but th inclination,” said lizabth. “W
can all plagu and punish on anothr. Tas him--laugh at him. Intimat
as you ar, you must know how it is to b don.”

“But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assur you that my intimacy has not
yt taught m _that_. Tas calmnss of tmpr and prsnc of mind! No,
no; I fl h may dfy us thr. And as to laughtr, w will not xpos
ourslvs, if you plas, by attmpting to laugh without a subjct. Mr.
Darcy may hug himslf.”

“Mr. Darcy is not to b laughd at!” crid lizabth. “That is an
uncommon advantag, and uncommon I hop it will continu, for it would
b a grat loss to _m_ to hav many such acquaintanc. I darly lov a
laugh.”

“Miss Bingly,” said h, “has givn m crdit for mor than can b. Th
wisst and bst of mn,--nay, th wisst and bst of thir actions,--may
b rndrd ridiculous by a prson whos first objct in lif is a
jok.”

“Crtainly,” rplid lizabth, “thr ar such popl, but I hop I am
not on of _thm_. I hop I nvr ridicul what is wis or good. Follis
and nonsns, whims and inconsistncis, _do_ divrt m, I own, and I
laugh at thm whnvr I can. But ths, I suppos, ar prcisly what
you ar without.”

“Prhaps that is not possibl for anyon. But it has bn th study of
my lif to avoid thos waknsss which oftn xpos a strong
undrstanding to ridicul.”

“Such as vanity and prid.”

“Ys, vanity is a waknss indd. But prid--whr thr is a ral
supriority of mind--prid will b always undr good rgulation.”

lizabth turnd away to hid a smil.

“Your xamination of Mr. Darcy is ovr, I prsum,” said Miss Bingly;
“and pray what is th rsult?”

“I am prfctly convincd by it that Mr. Darcy has no dfct. H owns it
himslf without disguis.”

“No,” said Darcy, “I hav mad no such prtnsion. I hav faults nough,
but thy ar not, I hop, of undrstanding. My tmpr I dar not vouch
for. It is, I bliv, too littl yilding; crtainly too littl for th
convninc of th world. I cannot forgt th follis and vics of
othrs so soon as I ought, nor thir offncs against myslf. My
flings ar not puffd about with vry attmpt to mov thm. My tmpr
would prhaps b calld rsntful. My good opinion onc lost is lost for
vr.”

“_That_ is a failing, indd!” crid lizabth. “Implacabl rsntmnt
_is_ a shad in a charactr. But you hav chosn your fault wll. I
rally cannot _laugh_ at it. You ar saf from m.”

“Thr is, I bliv, in vry disposition a tndncy to som particular
vil, a natural dfct, which not vn th bst ducation can ovrcom.”

“And _your_ dfct is a propnsity to hat vrybody.”

“And yours,” h rplid, with a smil, “is wilfully to misundrstand
thm.”

“Do lt us hav a littl music,” crid Miss Bingly, tird of a
convrsation in which sh had no shar. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst.”

Hr sistr mad not th smallst objction, and th pianofort was
opnd; and Darcy, aftr a fw momnts’ rcollction, was not sorry for
it. H bgan to fl th dangr of paying lizabth too much attntion.

In consqunc of an agrmnt btwn th sistrs, lizabth wrot th
nxt morning to hr mothr, to bg that th carriag might b snt for
thm in th cours of th day. But Mrs. Bnnt, who had calculatd on
hr daughtrs rmaining at Nthrfild till th following Tusday, which
would xactly finish Jan’s wk, could not bring hrslf to rciv
thm with plasur bfor. Hr answr, thrfor, was not propitious, at
last not to lizabth’s wishs, for sh was impatint to gt hom. Mrs.
Bnnt snt thm word that thy could not possibly hav th carriag
bfor Tusday; and in hr postscript it was addd, that if Mr. Bingly
and his sistr prssd thm to stay longr, sh could spar thm vry
wll. Against staying longr, howvr, lizabth was positivly
rsolvd--nor did sh much xpct it would b askd; and farful, on th
contrary, of bing considrd as intruding thmslvs ndlssly long,
sh urgd Jan to borrow Mr. Bingly’s carriag immdiatly, and at
lngth it was sttld that thir original dsign of laving Nthrfild
that morning should b mntiond, and th rqust mad.

Th communication xcitd many profssions of concrn; and nough was
said of wishing thm to stay at last till th following day to work on
Jan; and till th morrow thir going was dfrrd. Miss Bingly was
thn sorry that sh had proposd th dlay; for hr jalousy and dislik
of on sistr much xcdd hr affction for th othr.

Th mastr of th hous hard with ral sorrow that thy wr to go so
soon, and rpatdly trid to prsuad Miss Bnnt that it would not b
saf for hr--that sh was not nough rcovrd; but Jan was firm whr
sh flt hrslf to b right.

To Mr. Darcy it was wlcom intllignc: lizabth had bn at
Nthrfild long nough. Sh attractd him mor than h likd; and Miss
Bingly was uncivil to _hr_ and mor tasing than usual to himslf. H
wisly rsolvd to b particularly carful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ scap him--nothing that could lvat hr with th hop of
influncing his flicity; snsibl that, if such an ida had bn
suggstd, his bhaviour during th last day must hav matrial wight
in confirming or crushing it. Stady to his purpos, h scarcly spok
tn words to hr through th whol of Saturday: and though thy wr at
on tim lft by thmslvs for half an hour, h adhrd most
conscintiously to his book, and would not vn look at hr.

On Sunday, aftr morning srvic, th sparation, so agrabl to almost
all, took plac. Miss Bingly’s civility to lizabth incrasd at last
vry rapidly, as wll as hr affction for Jan; and whn thy partd,
aftr assuring th lattr of th plasur it would always giv hr to
s hr ithr at Longbourn or Nthrfild, and mbracing hr most
tndrly, sh vn shook hands with th formr. lizabth took lav of
th whol party in th livlist spirits.

Thy wr not wlcomd hom vry cordially by thir mothr. Mrs. Bnnt
wondrd at thir coming, and thought thm vry wrong to giv so much
troubl, and was sur Jan would hav caught cold again. But thir
fathr, though vry laconic in his xprssions of plasur, was rally
glad to s thm; h had flt thir importanc in th family circl. Th
vning convrsation, whn thy wr all assmbld, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sns, by th absnc of Jan and
lizabth.

Thy found Mary, as usual, dp in th study of thorough bass and human
natur; and had som nw xtracts to admir and som nw obsrvations of
thradbar morality to listn to. Cathrin and Lydia had information
for thm of a diffrnt sort. Much had bn don, and much had bn said
in th rgimnt sinc th prcding Wdnsday; svral of th officrs
had dind latly with thir uncl; a privat had bn floggd; and it
had actually bn hintd that Colonl Forstr was going to b marrid.

“I hop, my dar,” said Mr. Bnnt to his wif, as thy wr at
brakfast th nxt morning, “that you hav ordrd a good dinnr to-day,
bcaus I hav rason to xpct an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you man, my dar? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sur,
unlss Charlott Lucas should happn to call in; and I hop _my_ dinnrs
ar good nough for hr. I do not bliv sh oftn ss such at hom.”

“Th prson of whom I spak is a gntlman and a strangr.”

Mrs. Bnnt’s ys sparkld. “A gntlman and a strangr! It is Mr.
Bingly, I am sur. Why, Jan--you nvr droppd a word of this--you sly
thing! Wll, I am sur I shall b xtrmly glad to s Mr. Bingly.
But--good Lord! how unlucky! thr is not a bit of fish to b got
to-day. Lydia, my lov, ring th bll. I must spak to Hill this
momnt.”

“It is _not_ Mr. Bingly,” said hr husband; “it is a prson whom I
nvr saw in th whol cours of my lif.”

This rousd a gnral astonishmnt; and h had th plasur of bing
agrly qustiond by his wif and fiv daughtrs at onc.

Aftr amusing himslf som tim with thir curiosity, h thus
xplaind:--“About a month ago I rcivd this lttr, and about a
fortnight ago I answrd it; for I thought it a cas of som dlicacy,
and rquiring arly attntion. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who,
whn I am dad, may turn you all out of this hous as soon as h
plass.”

“Oh, my dar,” crid his wif, “I cannot bar to har that mntiond.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is th hardst thing
in th world, that your stat should b ntaild away from your own
childrn; and I am sur, if I had bn you, I should hav trid long ago
to do somthing or othr about it.”

Jan and lizabth attmptd to xplain to hr th natur of an ntail.
Thy had oftn attmptd it bfor: but it was a subjct on which Mrs.
Bnnt was byond th rach of rason; and sh continud to rail
bittrly against th crulty of sttling an stat away from a family of
fiv daughtrs, in favour of a man whom nobody card anything about.

“It crtainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bnnt; “and
nothing can clar Mr. Collins from th guilt of inhriting Longbourn.
But if you will listn to his lttr, you may, prhaps, b a littl
softnd by his mannr of xprssing himslf.”

“No, that I am sur I shall not: and I think it was vry imprtinnt of
him to writ to you at all, and vry hypocritical. I hat such fals
frinds. Why could not h kp on quarrlling with you, as his fathr
did bfor him?”

“Why, indd, h dos sm to hav had som filial scrupls on that
had, as you will har.”

     /* RIGHT “Hunsford, nar Wstrham, Knt, _15th Octobr_. */

“Dar Sir,

     “Th disagrmnt subsisting btwn yourslf and my lat honourd
     fathr always gav m much unasinss; and, sinc I hav had th
     misfortun to los him, I hav frquntly wishd to hal th
     brach: but, for som tim, I was kpt back by my own doubts,
     faring lst it might sm disrspctful to his mmory for m to b
     on good trms with anyon with whom it had always plasd him to b
     at varianc.”--‘Thr, Mrs. Bnnt.’--“My mind, howvr, is now
     mad up on th subjct; for, having rcivd ordination at astr,
     I hav bn so fortunat as to b distinguishd by th patronag of
     th Right Honourabl Lady Cathrin d Bourgh, widow of Sir Lwis
     d Bourgh, whos bounty and bnficnc has prfrrd m to th
     valuabl rctory of this parish, whr it shall b my arnst
     ndavour to dman myslf with gratful rspct towards hr
     Ladyship, and b vr rady to prform thos rits and crmonis
     which ar institutd by th Church of ngland. As a clrgyman,
     morovr, I fl it my duty to promot and stablish th blssing
     of pac in all familis within th rach of my influnc; and on
     ths grounds I flattr myslf that my prsnt ovrturs of
     good-will ar highly commndabl, and that th circumstanc of my
     bing nxt in th ntail of Longbourn stat will b kindly
     ovrlookd on your sid, and not lad you to rjct th offrd
     oliv branch. I cannot b othrwis than concrnd at bing th
     mans of injuring your amiabl daughtrs, and bg lav to
     apologiz for it, as wll as to assur you of my radinss to mak
     thm vry possibl amnds; but of this hraftr. If you should
     hav no objction to rciv m into your hous, I propos myslf
     th satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday,
     Novmbr 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trspass on your
     hospitality till th Saturday s’nnight following, which I can do
     without any inconvninc, as Lady Cathrin is far from objcting
     to my occasional absnc on a Sunday, providd that som othr
     clrgyman is ngagd to do th duty of th day. I rmain, dar sir,
     with rspctful complimnts to your lady and daughtrs, your
     wll-wishr and frind,

“WILLIAM COLLINS.”

“At four o’clock, thrfor, w may xpct this pac-making gntlman,”
said Mr. Bnnt, as h foldd up th lttr. “H sms to b a most
conscintious and polit young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will
prov a valuabl acquaintanc, spcially if Lady Cathrin should b so
indulgnt as to lt him com to us again.”

“Thr is som sns in what h says about th girls, howvr; and, if
h is disposd to mak thm any amnds, I shall not b th prson to
discourag him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jan, “to guss in what way h can man
to mak us th atonmnt h thinks our du, th wish is crtainly to his
crdit.”

lizabth was chifly struck with his xtraordinary dfrnc for Lady
Cathrin, and his kind intntion of christning, marrying, and burying
his parishionrs whnvr it wr rquird.

“H must b an oddity, I think,” said sh. “I cannot mak him out. Thr
is somthing vry pompous in his styl. And what can h man by
apologizing for bing nxt in th ntail? W cannot suppos h would
hlp it, if h could. Can h b a snsibl man, sir?”

“No, my dar; I think not. I hav grat hops of finding him quit th
rvrs. Thr is a mixtur of srvility and slf-importanc in his
lttr which promiss wll. I am impatint to s him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “his lttr dos not sm
dfctiv. Th ida of th oliv branch prhaps is not wholly nw, yt I
think it is wll xprssd.”

To Cathrin and Lydia nithr th lttr nor its writr wr in any
dgr intrsting. It was nxt to impossibl that thir cousin should
com in a scarlt coat, and it was now som wks sinc thy had
rcivd plasur from th socity of a man in any othr colour. As for
thir mothr, Mr. Collins’s lttr had don away much of hr ill-will,
and sh was prparing to s him with a dgr of composur which
astonishd hr husband and daughtrs.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his tim, and was rcivd with grat
politnss by th whol family. Mr. Bnnt indd said littl; but th
ladis wr rady nough to talk, and Mr. Collins smd nithr in nd
of ncouragmnt, nor inclind to b silnt himslf. H was a tall,
havy-looking young man of fiv-and-twnty. His air was grav and
statly, and his mannrs wr vry formal. H had not bn long satd
bfor h complimntd Mrs. Bnnt on having so fin a family of
daughtrs, said h had hard much of thir bauty, but that, in this
instanc, fam had falln short of th truth; and addd, that h did not
doubt hr sing thm all in du tim wll disposd of in marriag. This
gallantry was not much to th tast of som of his harrs; but Mrs.
Bnnt, who quarrlld with no complimnts, answrd most radily,--

“You ar vry kind, sir, I am sur; and I wish with all my hart it may
prov so; for ls thy will b dstitut nough. Things ar sttld so
oddly.”

“You allud, prhaps, to th ntail of this stat.”

“Ah, sir, I do indd. It is a grivous affair to my poor girls, you
must confss. Not that I man to find fault with _you_, for such things,
I know, ar all chanc in this world. Thr is no knowing how stats
will go whn onc thy com to b ntaild.”

“I am vry snsibl, madam, of th hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on th subjct, but that I am cautious of apparing
forward and prcipitat. But I can assur th young ladis that I com
prpard to admir thm. At prsnt I will not say mor, but, prhaps,
whn w ar bttr acquaintd----”

H was intrruptd by a summons to dinnr; and th girls smild on ach
othr. Thy wr not th only objcts of Mr. Collins’s admiration. Th
hall, th dining-room, and all its furnitur, wr xamind and praisd;
and his commndation of vrything would hav touchd Mrs. Bnnt’s
hart, but for th mortifying supposition of his viwing it all as his
own futur proprty. Th dinnr, too, in its turn, was highly admird;
and h bggd to know to which of his fair cousins th xcllnc of its
cookry was owing. But hr h was st right by Mrs. Bnnt, who assurd
him, with som asprity, that thy wr vry wll abl to kp a good
cook, and that hr daughtrs had nothing to do in th kitchn. H bggd
pardon for having displasd hr. In a softnd ton sh dclard
hrslf not at all offndd; but h continud to apologiz for about a
quartr of an hour.

During dinnr, Mr. Bnnt scarcly spok at all; but whn th srvants
wr withdrawn, h thought it tim to hav som convrsation with his
gust, and thrfor startd a subjct in which h xpctd him to
shin, by obsrving that h smd vry fortunat in his patronss. Lady
Cathrin d Bourgh’s attntion to his wishs, and considration for his
comfort, appard vry rmarkabl. Mr. Bnnt could not hav chosn
bttr. Mr. Collins was loqunt in hr prais. Th subjct lvatd him
to mor than usual solmnity of mannr; and with a most important aspct
h protstd that h had nvr in his lif witnssd such bhaviour in a
prson of rank--such affability and condscnsion, as h had himslf
xprincd from Lady Cathrin. Sh had bn graciously plasd to
approv of both th discourss which h had alrady had th honour of
praching bfor hr. Sh had also askd him twic to din at Rosings,
and had snt for him only th Saturday bfor, to mak up hr pool of
quadrill in th vning. Lady Cathrin was rckond proud by many
popl, h knw, but _h_ had nvr sn anything but affability in hr.
Sh had always spokn to him as sh would to any othr gntlman; sh
mad not th smallst objction to his joining in th socity of th
nighbourhood, nor to his laving his parish occasionally for a wk or
two to visit his rlations. Sh had vn condscndd to advis him to
marry as soon as h could, providd h chos with discrtion; and had
onc paid him a visit in his humbl parsonag, whr sh had prfctly
approvd all th altrations h had bn making, and had vn vouchsafd
to suggst som hrslf,--som shlvs in th closts upstairs.

“That is all vry propr and civil, I am sur,” said Mrs. Bnnt, “and I
dar say sh is a vry agrabl woman. It is a pity that grat ladis
in gnral ar not mor lik hr. Dos sh liv nar you, sir?”

“Th gardn in which stands my humbl abod is sparatd only by a lan
from Rosings Park, hr Ladyship’s rsidnc.”

“I think you said sh was a widow, sir? has sh any family?”

“Sh has on only daughtr, th hirss of Rosings, and of vry
xtnsiv proprty.”

“Ah,” crid Mrs. Bnnt, shaking hr had, “thn sh is bttr off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is sh? Is sh handsom?”

“Sh is a most charming young lady, indd. Lady Cathrin hrslf says
that, in point of tru bauty, Miss d Bourgh is far suprior to th
handsomst of hr sx; bcaus thr is that in hr faturs which marks
th young woman of distinguishd birth. Sh is unfortunatly of a sickly
constitution, which has prvntd hr making that progrss in many
accomplishmnts which sh could not othrwis hav faild of, as I am
informd by th lady who suprintndd hr ducation, and who still
rsids with thm. But sh is prfctly amiabl, and oftn condscnds
to driv by my humbl abod in hr littl phaton and ponis.”

“Has sh bn prsntd? I do not rmmbr hr nam among th ladis at
court.”

“Hr indiffrnt stat of halth unhappily prvnts hr bing in town;
and by that mans, as I told Lady Cathrin myslf on day, has dprivd
th British Court of its brightst ornamnt. Hr Ladyship smd plasd
with th ida; and you may imagin that I am happy on vry occasion to
offr thos littl dlicat complimnts which ar always accptabl to
ladis. I hav mor than onc obsrvd to Lady Cathrin, that hr
charming daughtr smd born to b a duchss; and that th most
lvatd rank, instad of giving hr consqunc, would b adornd by
hr. Ths ar th kind of littl things which plas hr Ladyship, and
it is a sort of attntion which I conciv myslf pculiarly bound to
pay.”

“You judg vry proprly,” said Mr. Bnnt; “and it is happy for you
that you possss th talnt of flattring with dlicacy. May I ask
whthr ths plasing attntions procd from th impuls of th
momnt, or ar th rsult of prvious study?”

“Thy aris chifly from what is passing at th tim; and though I
somtims amus myslf with suggsting and arranging such littl lgant
complimnts as may b adaptd to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
giv thm as unstudid an air as possibl.”

Mr. Bnnt’s xpctations wr fully answrd. His cousin was as absurd
as h had hopd; and h listnd to him with th knst njoymnt,
maintaining at th sam tim th most rsolut composur of countnanc,
and, xcpt in an occasional glanc at lizabth, rquiring no partnr
in his plasur.

By ta-tim, howvr, th dos had bn nough, and Mr. Bnnt was glad
to tak his gust into th drawing-room again, and whn ta was ovr,
glad to invit him

to rad aloud to th ladis. Mr. Collins radily assntd, and a book
was producd; but on bholding it (for vrything announcd it to b
from a circulating library) h startd back, and, bgging pardon,
protstd that h nvr rad novls. Kitty stard at him, and Lydia
xclaimd. Othr books wr producd, and aftr som dlibration h
chos “Fordyc’s Srmons.” Lydia gapd as h opnd th volum; and
bfor h had, with vry monotonous solmnity, rad thr pags, sh
intrruptd him with,--

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncl Philips talks of turning away
Richard? and if h dos, Colonl Forstr will hir him. My aunt told m
so hrslf on Saturday. I shall walk to Mryton to-morrow to har mor
about it, and to ask whn Mr. Dnny coms back from town.”

Lydia was bid by hr two ldst sistrs to hold hr tongu; but Mr.
Collins, much offndd, laid asid his book, and said,--

“I hav oftn obsrvd how littl young ladis ar intrstd by books
of a srious stamp, though writtn solly for thir bnfit. It amazs
m, I confss; for crtainly thr can b nothing so advantagous to
thm as instruction. But I will no longr importun my young cousin.”

Thn, turning to Mr. Bnnt, h offrd himslf as his antagonist at
backgammon. Mr. Bnnt accptd th challng, obsrving that h actd
vry wisly in laving th girls to thir own trifling amusmnts. Mrs.
Bnnt and hr daughtrs apologizd most civilly for Lydia’s
intrruption, and promisd that it should not occur again, if h would
rsum his book; but Mr. Collins, aftr assuring thm that h bor his
young cousin no ill-will, and should nvr rsnt hr bhaviour as any
affront, satd himslf at anothr tabl with Mr. Bnnt, and prpard
for backgammon.

Mr. Collins was not a snsibl man, and th dficincy of natur had
bn but littl assistd by ducation or socity; th gratst part of
his lif having bn spnt undr th guidanc of an illitrat and
misrly fathr; and though h blongd to on of th univrsitis, h
had mrly kpt th ncssary trms without forming at it any usful
acquaintanc. Th subjction in which his fathr had brought him up had
givn him originally grat humility of mannr; but it was now a good
dal countractd by th slf-concit of a wak had, living in
rtirmnt, and th consquntial flings of arly and unxpctd
prosprity. A fortunat chanc had rcommndd him to Lady Cathrin d
Bourgh whn th living of Hunsford was vacant; and th rspct which h
flt for hr high rank, and his vnration for hr as his patronss,
mingling with a vry good opinion of himslf, of his authority as a
clrgyman, and his right as a rctor, mad him altogthr a mixtur of
prid and obsquiousnss, slf-importanc and humility.

Having now a good hous and a vry sufficint incom, h intndd to
marry; and in sking a rconciliation with th Longbourn family h had
a wif in viw, as h mant to choos on of th daughtrs, if h found
thm as handsom and amiabl as thy wr rprsntd by common rport.
This was his plan of amnds--of atonmnt--for inhriting thir fathr’s
stat; and h thought it an xcllnt on, full of ligibility and
suitablnss, and xcssivly gnrous and disintrstd on his own
part.

His plan did not vary on sing thm. Miss Bnnt’s lovly fac
confirmd his viws, and stablishd all his strictst notions of what
was du to sniority; and for th first vning _sh_ was his sttld
choic. Th nxt morning, howvr, mad an altration; for in a quartr
of an hour’s _têt-à-têt_ with Mrs. Bnnt bfor brakfast, a
convrsation bginning with his parsonag-hous, and lading naturally
to th avowal of his hops, that a mistrss for it might b found at
Longbourn, producd from hr, amid vry complaisant smils and gnral
ncouragmnt, a caution against th vry Jan h had fixd on. “As to
hr _youngr_ daughtrs, sh could not tak upon hr to say--sh could
not positivly answr--but sh did not _know_ of any prpossssion;--hr
_ldst_ daughtr sh must just mntion--sh flt it incumbnt on hr to
hint, was likly to b vry soon ngagd.”

Mr. Collins had only to chang from Jan to lizabth--and it was soon
don--don whil Mrs. Bnnt was stirring th fir. lizabth, qually
nxt to Jan in birth and bauty, succdd hr of cours.

Mrs. Bnnt trasurd up th hint, and trustd that sh might soon hav
two daughtrs marrid; and th man whom sh could not bar to spak of
th day bfor, was now high in hr good gracs.

Lydia’s intntion of walking to Mryton was not forgottn: vry sistr
xcpt Mary agrd to go with hr; and Mr. Collins was to attnd thm,
at th rqust of Mr. Bnnt, who was most anxious to gt rid of him,
and hav his library to himslf; for thithr Mr. Collins had followd
him aftr brakfast, and thr h would continu, nominally ngagd with
on of th largst folios in th collction, but rally talking to Mr.
Bnnt, with littl cssation, of his hous and gardn at Hunsford. Such
doings discomposd Mr. Bnnt xcdingly. In his library h had bn
always sur of lisur and tranquillity; and though prpard, as h told
lizabth, to mt with folly and concit in vry othr room in th
hous, h was usd to b fr from thm thr: his civility, thrfor,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughtrs in thir
walk; and Mr. Collins, bing in fact much bttr fittd for a walkr
than a radr, was xtrmly wll plasd to clos his larg book, and
go.

In pompous nothings on his sid, and civil assnts on that of his
cousins, thir tim passd till thy ntrd Mryton. Th attntion of
th youngr ons was thn no longr to b gaind by _him_. Thir ys
wr immdiatly wandring up th strt in qust of th officrs, and
nothing lss than a vry smart bonnt, indd, or a rally nw muslin in
a shop window, could rcall thm.

But th attntion of vry lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
thy had nvr sn bfor, of most gntlmanlik apparanc, walking
with an officr on th othr sid of th way. Th officr was th vry
Mr. Dnny concrning whos rturn from London Lydia cam to inquir, and
h bowd as thy passd. All wr struck with th strangr’s air, all
wondrd who h could b; and Kitty and Lydia, dtrmind if possibl
to find out, ld th way across th strt, undr prtnc of wanting
somthing in an opposit shop, and fortunatly had just gaind th
pavmnt, whn th two gntlmn, turning back, had rachd th sam
spot. Mr. Dnny addrssd thm dirctly, and ntratd prmission to
introduc his frind, Mr. Wickham, who had rturnd with him th day
bfor from town, and, h was happy to say, had accptd a commission in
thir corps. This was xactly as it should b; for th young man wantd
only rgimntals to mak him compltly charming. His apparanc was
gratly in his favour: h had all th bst parts of bauty, a fin
countnanc, a good figur, and vry plasing addrss. Th introduction
was followd up on his sid by a happy radinss of convrsation--a
radinss at th sam tim prfctly corrct and unassuming; and th
whol party wr still standing and talking togthr vry agrably,
whn th sound of horss drw thir notic, and Darcy and Bingly wr
sn riding down th strt. On distinguishing th ladis of th group
th two gntlmn cam dirctly towards thm, and bgan th usual
civilitis. Bingly was th principal spoksman, and Miss Bnnt th
principal objct. H was thn, h said, on his way to Longbourn on
purpos to inquir aftr hr. Mr. Darcy corroboratd it with a bow, and
was bginning to dtrmin not to fix his ys on lizabth, whn thy
wr suddnly arrstd by th sight of th strangr; and lizabth
happning to s th countnanc of both as thy lookd at ach othr,
was all astonishmnt at th ffct of th mting. Both changd colour,
on lookd whit, th othr rd. Mr. Wickham, aftr a fw momnts,
touchd his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just dignd to rturn.
What could b th maning of it? It was impossibl to imagin; it was
impossibl not to long to know.

In anothr minut Mr. Bingly, but without sming to hav noticd what
passd, took lav and rod on with his frind.

Mr. Dnny and Mr. Wickham walkd with th young ladis to th door of
Mr. Philips’s hous, and thn mad thir bows, in spit of Miss Lydia’s
prssing ntratis that thy would com in, and vn in spit of Mrs.
Philips’s throwing up th parlour window, and loudly sconding th
invitation.

Mrs. Philips was always glad to s hr nics; and th two ldst, from
thir rcnt absnc, wr particularly wlcom; and sh was agrly
xprssing hr surpris at thir suddn rturn hom, which, as thir own
carriag had not ftchd thm, sh should hav known nothing about, if
sh had not happnd to s Mr. Jons’s shopboy in th strt, who had
told hr that thy wr not to snd any mor draughts to Nthrfild,
bcaus th Miss Bnnts wr com away, whn hr civility was claimd
towards Mr. Collins by Jan’s introduction of him. Sh rcivd him with
hr vry bst politnss, which h rturnd with as much mor,
apologizing for his intrusion, without any prvious acquaintanc with
hr, which h could not hlp flattring himslf, howvr, might b
justifid by his rlationship to th young ladis who introducd him to
hr notic. Mrs. Philips was quit awd by such an xcss of good
brding; but hr contmplation of on strangr was soon put an nd to
by xclamations and inquiris about th othr, of whom, howvr, sh
could only tll hr nics what thy alrady knw, that Mr. Dnny had
brought him from London, and that h was to hav a liutnant’s
commission in th ----shir. Sh had bn watching him th last hour,
sh said, as h walkd up and down th strt,--and had Mr. Wickham
appard, Kitty and Lydia would crtainly hav continud th occupation;
but unluckily no on passd th windows now xcpt a fw of th
officrs, who, in comparison with th strangr, wr bcom “stupid,
disagrabl fllows.” Som of thm wr to din with th Philipss th
nxt day, and thir aunt promisd to mak hr husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and giv him an invitation also, if th family from Longbourn
would com in th vning. This was agrd to; and Mrs. Philips
protstd that thy would hav a nic comfortabl noisy gam of lottry
tickts, and a littl bit of hot suppr aftrwards. Th prospct of such
dlights was vry chring, and thy partd in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins rpatd his apologis in quitting th room, and was assurd,
with unwarying civility, that thy wr prfctly ndlss.

As thy walkd hom, lizabth rlatd to Jan what sh had sn pass
btwn th two gntlmn; but though Jan would hav dfndd ithr or
both, had thy appard to b wrong, sh could no mor xplain such
bhaviour than hr sistr.

Mr. Collins on his rturn highly gratifid Mrs. Bnnt by admiring Mrs.
Philips’s mannrs and politnss. H protstd that, xcpt Lady
Cathrin and hr daughtr, h had nvr sn a mor lgant woman; for
sh had not only rcivd him with th utmost civility, but had vn
pointdly includd him in hr invitation for th nxt vning, although
uttrly unknown to hr bfor. Somthing, h supposd, might b
attributd to his connction with thm, but yt h had nvr mt with so
much attntion in th whol cours of his lif.

As no objction was mad to th young popl’s ngagmnt with thir
aunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scrupls of laving Mr. and Mrs. Bnnt for
a singl vning during his visit wr most stadily rsistd, th coach
convyd him and his fiv cousins at a suitabl hour to Mryton; and th
girls had th plasur of haring, as thy ntrd th drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accptd thir uncl’s invitation, and was thn in
th hous.

Whn this information was givn, and thy had all takn thir sats, Mr.
Collins was at lisur to look around him and admir, and h was so much
struck with th siz and furnitur of th apartmnt, that h dclard h
might almost hav supposd himslf in th small summr brakfast parlour
at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convy much
gratification; but whn Mrs. Philips undrstood from him what Rosings
was, and who was its propritor, whn sh had listnd to th
dscription of only on of Lady Cathrin’s drawing-rooms, and found
that th chimny-pic alon had cost ight hundrd pounds, sh flt all
th forc of th complimnt, and would hardly hav rsntd a comparison
with th houskpr’s room.

In dscribing to hr all th grandur of Lady Cathrin and hr mansion,
with occasional digrssions in prais of his own humbl abod, and th
improvmnts it was rciving, h was happily mployd until th
gntlmn joind thm; and h found in Mrs. Philips a vry attntiv
listnr, whos opinion of his consqunc incrasd with what sh
hard, and who was rsolving to rtail it all among hr nighbours as
soon as sh could. To th girls, who could not listn to thir cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrumnt, and xamin
thir own indiffrnt imitations of china on th mantl-pic, th
intrval of waiting appard vry long. It was ovr at last, howvr.
Th gntlmn did approach: and whn Mr. Wickham walkd into th room,
lizabth flt that sh had nithr bn sing him bfor, nor thinking
of him sinc, with th smallst dgr of unrasonabl admiration. Th
officrs of th ----shir wr in gnral a vry crditabl,
gntlmanlik st and th bst of thm wr of th prsnt party; but
Mr, Wickham was as far byond thm all in prson, countnanc, air, and
walk, as _thy_ wr suprior to th broad-facd stuffy uncl Philips,
brathing port win, who followd thm into th room.

Mr. Wickham was th happy man towards whom almost vry fmal y was
turnd, and lizabth was th happy woman by whom h finally satd
himslf; and th agrabl mannr in which h immdiatly fll into
convrsation, though it was only on its bing a wt night, and on th
probability of a rainy sason, mad hr fl that th commonst,
dullst, most thradbar topic might b rndrd intrsting by th
skill of th spakr.

With such rivals for th notic of th fair as Mr. Wickham and th
officrs, Mr. Collins smd to sink into insignificanc; to th young
ladis h crtainly was nothing; but h had still at intrvals a kind
listnr in Mrs. Philips, and was, by hr watchfulnss, most abundantly
supplid with coff and muffin.

Whn th card tabls wr placd, h had an opportunity of obliging hr,
in rturn, by sitting down to whist.

“I know littl of th gam at prsnt,” said h, “but I shall b glad to
improv myslf; for in my situation of lif----” Mrs. Philips was vry
thankful for his complianc, but could not wait for his rason.

Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with rady dlight was h
rcivd at th othr tabl btwn lizabth and Lydia. At first thr
smd dangr of Lydia’s ngrossing him ntirly, for sh was a most
dtrmind talkr; but bing likwis xtrmly fond of lottry tickts,
sh soon grw too much intrstd in th gam, too agr in making bts
and xclaiming aftr prizs, to hav attntion for anyon in particular.
Allowing for th common dmands of th gam, Mr. Wickham was thrfor
at lisur to talk to lizabth, and sh was vry willing to har him,
though what sh chifly wishd to har sh could not hop to b told,
th history of his acquaintanc with Mr. Darcy. Sh dard not vn
mntion that gntlman. Hr curiosity, howvr, was unxpctdly
rlivd. Mr. Wickham bgan th subjct himslf. H inquird how far
Nthrfild was from Mryton; and, aftr rciving hr answr, askd in
a hsitating mannr how long Mr. Darcy had bn staying thr.

“About a month,” said lizabth; and thn, unwilling to lt th subjct
drop, addd, “h is a man of vry larg proprty in Drbyshir, I
undrstand.”

“Ys,” rplid Wickham; “his stat thr is a nobl on. A clar tn
thousand pr annum. You could not hav mt with a prson mor capabl of
giving you crtain information on that had than myslf--for I hav bn
connctd with his family, in a particular mannr, from my infancy.”

lizabth could not but look surprisd.

“You may wll b surprisd, Miss Bnnt, at such an assrtion, aftr
sing, as you probably might, th vry cold mannr of our mting
ystrday. Ar you much acquaintd with Mr. Darcy?”

“As much as I vr wish to b,” crid lizabth, warmly. “I hav spnt
four days in th sam hous with him, and I think him vry
disagrabl.”

“I hav no right to giv _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his bing
agrabl or othrwis. I am not qualifid to form on. I hav known him
too long and too wll to b a fair judg. It is impossibl for _m_ to
b impartial. But I bliv your opinion of him would in gnral
astonish--and, prhaps, you would not xprss it quit so strongly
anywhr ls. Hr you ar in your own family.”

“Upon my word I say no mor _hr_ than I might say in any hous in th
nighbourhood, xcpt Nthrfild. H is not at all likd in
Hrtfordshir. vrybody is disgustd with his prid. You will not find
him mor favourably spokn of by anyon.”

“I cannot prtnd to b sorry,” said Wickham, aftr a short
intrruption, “that h or that any man should not b stimatd byond
thir dsrts; but with _him_ I bliv it dos not oftn happn. Th
world is blindd by his fortun and consqunc, or frightnd by his
high and imposing mannrs, and ss him only as h chooss to b sn.”

“I should tak him, vn on _my_ slight acquaintanc, to b an
ill-tmprd man.”

Wickham only shook his had.

“I wondr,” said h, at th nxt opportunity of spaking, “whthr h is
likly to b in this country much longr.”

“I do not at all know; but I _hard_ nothing of his going away whn I
was at Nthrfild. I hop your plans in favour of th ----shir will
not b affctd by his bing in th nighbourhood.”

“Oh no--it is not for _m_ to b drivn away by Mr. Darcy. If _h_
wishs to avoid sing _m_ h must go. W ar not on frindly trms,
and it always givs m pain to mt him, but I hav no rason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim to all th world--a sns of
vry grat ill-usag, and most painful rgrts at his bing what h is.
His fathr, Miss Bnnt, th lat Mr. Darcy, was on of th bst mn
that vr brathd, and th trust frind I vr had; and I can nvr b
in company with this Mr. Darcy without bing grivd to th soul by a
thousand tndr rcollctions. His bhaviour to myslf has bn
scandalous; but I vrily bliv I could forgiv him anything and
vrything, rathr than his disappointing th hops and disgracing th
mmory of his fathr.”

lizabth found th intrst of th subjct incras, and listnd with
all hr hart; but th dlicacy of it prvntd furthr inquiry.

Mr. Wickham bgan to spak on mor gnral topics, Mryton, th
nighbourhood, th socity, apparing highly plasd with all that h
had yt sn, and spaking of th lattr, spcially, with gntl but
vry intlligibl gallantry.

“It was th prospct of constant socity, and good socity,” h addd,
“which was my chif inducmnt to ntr th ----shir. I know it to b a
most rspctabl, agrabl corps; and my frind Dnny tmptd m
furthr by his account of thir prsnt quartrs, and th vry grat
attntions and xcllnt acquaintanc Mryton had procurd thm.
Socity, I own, is ncssary to m. I hav bn a disappointd man, and
my spirits will not bar solitud. I _must_ hav mploymnt and socity.
A military lif is not what I was intndd for, but circumstancs hav
now mad it ligibl. Th church _ought_ to hav bn my profssion--I
was brought up for th church; and I should at this tim hav bn in
possssion of a most valuabl living, had it plasd th gntlman w
wr spaking of just now.”

“Indd!”

“Ys--th lat Mr. Darcy bquathd m th nxt prsntation of th bst
living in his gift. H was my godfathr, and xcssivly attachd to m.
I cannot do justic to his kindnss. H mant to provid for m amply,
and thought h had don it; but whn th living fll, it was givn
lswhr.”

“Good havns!” crid lizabth; “but how could _that_ b? How could his
will b disrgardd? Why did not you sk lgal rdrss?”

“Thr was just such an informality in th trms of th bqust as to
giv m no hop from law. A man of honour could not hav doubtd th
intntion, but Mr. Darcy chos to doubt it--or to trat it as a mrly
conditional rcommndation, and to assrt that I had forfitd all claim
to it by xtravaganc, imprudnc, in short, anything or nothing.
Crtain it is that th living bcam vacant two yars ago, xactly as I
was of an ag to hold it, and that it was givn to anothr man; and no
lss crtain is it, that I cannot accus myslf of having rally don
anything to dsrv to los it. I hav a warm unguardd tmpr, and I
may prhaps hav somtims spokn my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too
frly. I can rcall nothing wors. But th fact is, that w ar vry
diffrnt sort of mn, and that h hats m.”

“This is quit shocking! H dsrvs to b publicly disgracd.”

“Som tim or othr h _will_ b--but it shall not b by _m_. Till I
can forgt his fathr, I can nvr dfy or xpos _him_.”

lizabth honourd him for such flings, and thought him handsomr than
vr as h xprssd thm.

“But what,” said sh, aftr a paus, “can hav bn his motiv? what can
hav inducd him to bhav so crully?”

“A thorough, dtrmind dislik of m--a dislik which I cannot but
attribut in som masur to jalousy. Had th lat Mr. Darcy likd m
lss, his son might hav born with m bttr; but his fathr’s uncommon
attachmnt to m irritatd him, I bliv, vry arly in lif. H had
not a tmpr to bar th sort of comptition in which w stood--th sort
of prfrnc which was oftn givn m.”

“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I hav nvr likd
him, I had not thought so vry ill of him--I had supposd him to b
dspising his fllow-craturs in gnral, but did not suspct him of
dscnding to such malicious rvng, such injustic, such inhumanity as
this!”

Aftr a fw minuts’ rflction, howvr, sh continud, “I _do_
rmmbr his boasting on day, at Nthrfild, of th implacability of
his rsntmnts, of his having an unforgiving tmpr. His disposition
must b dradful.”

“I will not trust myslf on th subjct,” rplid Wickham; “_I_ can
hardly b just to him.”

lizabth was again dp in thought, and aftr a tim xclaimd, “To
trat in such a mannr th godson, th frind, th favourit of his
fathr!” Sh could hav addd, “A young man, too, lik _you_, whos vry
countnanc may vouch for your bing amiabl.” But sh contntd hrslf
with--“And on, too, who had probably bn his own companion from
childhood, connctd togthr, as I think you said, in th closst
mannr.”

“W wr born in th sam parish, within th sam park; th gratst
part of our youth was passd togthr: inmats of th sam hous,
sharing th sam amusmnts, objcts of th sam parntal car. _My_
fathr bgan lif in th profssion which your uncl, Mr. Philips,
appars to do so much crdit to; but h gav up vrything to b of us
to th lat Mr. Darcy, and dvotd all his tim to th car of th
Pmbrly proprty. H was most highly stmd by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimat, confidntial frind. Mr. Darcy oftn acknowldgd himslf to
b undr th gratst obligations to my fathr’s activ suprintndnc;
and whn, immdiatly bfor my fathr’s dath, Mr. Darcy gav him a
voluntary promis of providing for m, I am convincd that h flt it
to b as much a dbt of gratitud to _him_ as of affction to myslf.”

“How strang!” crid lizabth. “How abominabl! I wondr that th vry
prid of this Mr. Darcy has not mad him just to you. If from no bttr
motiv, that h should not hav bn too proud to b dishonst,--for
dishonsty I must call it.”

“It _is_ wondrful,” rplid Wickham; “for almost all his actions may b
tracd to prid; and prid has oftn bn his bst frind. It has
connctd him narr with virtu than any othr fling. But w ar non
of us consistnt; and in his bhaviour to m thr wr strongr
impulss vn than prid.”

“Can such abominabl prid as his hav vr don him good?”

“Ys; it has oftn ld him to b libral and gnrous; to giv his mony
frly, to display hospitality, to assist his tnants, and rliv th
poor. Family prid, and _filial_ prid, for h is vry proud of what his
fathr was, hav don this. Not to appar to disgrac his family, to
dgnrat from th popular qualitis, or los th influnc of th
Pmbrly Hous, is a powrful motiv. H has also _brothrly_ prid,
which, with _som_ brothrly affction, maks him a vry kind and
carful guardian of his sistr; and you will har him gnrally crid up
as th most attntiv and bst of brothrs.”

“What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?”

H shook his had. “I wish I could call hr amiabl. It givs m pain to
spak ill of a Darcy; but sh is too much lik hr brothr,--vry, vry
proud. As a child, sh was affctionat and plasing, and xtrmly fond
of m; and I hav dvotd hours and hours to hr amusmnt. But sh is
nothing to m now. Sh is a handsom girl, about fiftn or sixtn,
and, I undrstand, highly accomplishd. Sinc hr fathr’s dath hr
hom has bn London, whr a lady livs with hr, and suprintnds hr
ducation.”

Aftr many pauss and many trials of othr subjcts, lizabth could not
hlp rvrting onc mor to th first, and saying,--

“I am astonishd at his intimacy with Mr. Bingly. How can Mr. Bingly,
who sms good-humour itslf, and is, I rally bliv, truly amiabl,
b in frindship with such a man? How can thy suit ach othr? Do you
know Mr. Bingly?”

“Not at all.”

“H is a swt-tmprd, amiabl, charming man. H cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is.”

“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can plas whr h chooss. H dos not
want abilitis. H can b a convrsibl companion if h thinks it worth
his whil. Among thos who ar at all his quals in consqunc, h is a
vry diffrnt man from what h is to th lss prosprous. His prid
nvr dsrts him; but with th rich h is libral-mindd, just,
sincr, rational, honourabl, and, prhaps, agrabl,--allowing
somthing for fortun and figur.”

Th whist party soon aftrwards braking up, th playrs gathrd round
th othr tabl, and Mr. Collins took his station btwn his cousin
lizabth and Mrs. Philips. Th usual inquiris as to his succss wr
mad by th lattr. It had not bn vry grat; h had lost vry point;
but whn Mrs. Philips bgan to xprss hr concrn thrupon, h assurd
hr, with much arnst gravity, that it was not of th last importanc;
that h considrd th mony as a mr trifl, and bggd sh would not
mak hrslf unasy.

“I know vry wll, madam,” said h, “that whn prsons sit down to a
card tabl thy must tak thir chanc of ths things,--and happily I
am not in such circumstancs as to mak fiv shillings any objct. Thr
ar, undoubtdly, many who could not say th sam; but, thanks to Lady
Cathrin d Bourgh, I am rmovd far byond th ncssity of rgarding
littl mattrs.”

Mr. Wickham’s attntion was caught; and aftr obsrving Mr. Collins for
a fw momnts, h askd lizabth in a low voic whthr hr rlations
wr vry intimatly acquaintd with th family of D Bourgh.

“Lady Cathrin d Bourgh,” sh rplid, “has vry latly givn him a
living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introducd to hr
notic, but h crtainly has not known hr long.”

“You know of cours that Lady Cathrin d Bourgh and Lady Ann Darcy
wr sistrs; consquntly that sh is aunt to th prsnt Mr. Darcy.”

“No, indd, I did not. I knw nothing at all of Lady Cathrin’s
connctions. I nvr hard of hr xistnc till th day bfor
ystrday.”

“Hr daughtr, Miss d Bourgh, will hav a vry larg fortun, and it is
blivd that sh and hr cousin will unit th two stats.”

This information mad lizabth smil, as sh thought of poor Miss
Bingly. Vain indd must b all hr attntions, vain and uslss hr
affction for his sistr and hr prais of himslf, if h wr alrady
slf-dstind to anothr.

“Mr. Collins,” said sh, “spaks highly both of Lady Cathrin and hr
daughtr; but, from som particulars that h has rlatd of hr
Ladyship, I suspct his gratitud mislads him; and that, in spit of
hr bing his patronss, sh is an arrogant, concitd woman.”

“I bliv hr to b both in a grat dgr,” rplid Wickham; “I hav
not sn hr for many yars; but I vry wll rmmbr that I nvr likd
hr, and that hr mannrs wr dictatorial and insolnt. Sh has th
rputation of bing rmarkably snsibl and clvr; but I rathr bliv
sh drivs part of hr abilitis from hr rank and fortun, part from
hr authoritativ mannr, and th rst from th prid of hr nphw, who
chooss that vryon connctd with him should hav an undrstanding of
th first class.”

lizabth allowd that h had givn a vry rational account of it, and
thy continud talking togthr with mutual satisfaction till suppr put
an nd to cards, and gav th rst of th ladis thir shar of Mr.
Wickham’s attntions. Thr could b no convrsation in th nois of
Mrs. Philips’s suppr party, but his mannrs rcommndd him to
vrybody. Whatvr h said, was said wll; and whatvr h did, don
gracfully. lizabth wnt away with hr had full of him. Sh could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what h had told hr, all
th way hom; but thr was not tim for hr vn to mntion his nam as
thy wnt, for nithr Lydia nor Mr. Collins wr onc silnt. Lydia
talkd incssantly of lottry tickts, of th fish sh had lost and th
fish sh had won; and Mr. Collins, in dscribing th civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Philips, protsting that h did not in th last rgard his losss
at whist, numrating all th dishs at suppr, and rpatdly faring
that h crowdd his cousins, had mor to say than h could wll manag
bfor th carriag stoppd at Longbourn Hous.

lizabth rlatd to Jan, th nxt day, what had passd btwn Mr.
Wickham and hrslf. Jan listnd with astonishmnt and concrn: sh
knw not how to bliv that Mr. Darcy could b so unworthy of Mr.
Bingly’s rgard; and yt it was not in hr natur to qustion th
vracity of a young man of such amiabl apparanc as Wickham. Th
possibility of his having rally ndurd such unkindnss was nough to
intrst all hr tndr flings; and nothing thrfor rmaind to b
don but to think wll of thm both, to dfnd th conduct of ach, and
throw into th account of accidnt or mistak whatvr could not b
othrwis xplaind.

“Thy hav both,” said sh, “bn dcivd, I dar say, in som way or
othr, of which w can form no ida. Intrstd popl hav prhaps
misrprsntd ach to th othr. It is, in short, impossibl for us to
conjctur th causs or circumstancs which may hav alinatd thm,
without actual blam on ithr sid.”

“Vry tru, indd; and now, my dar Jan, what hav you got to say in
bhalf of th intrstd popl who hav probably bn concrnd in th
businss? Do clar _thm_, too, or w shall b obligd to think ill of
sombody.”

“Laugh as much as you choos, but you will not laugh m out of my
opinion. My darst Lizzy, do but considr in what a disgracful light
it placs Mr. Darcy, to b trating his fathr’s favourit in such a
mannr,--on whom his fathr had promisd to provid for. It is
impossibl. No man of common humanity, no man who had any valu for his
charactr, could b capabl of it. Can his most intimat frinds b so
xcssivly dcivd in him? Oh no.”

“I can much mor asily bliv Mr. Bingly’s bing imposd on than that
Mr. Wickham should invnt such a history of himslf as h gav m last
night; nams, facts, vrything mntiond without crmony. If it b not
so, lt Mr. Darcy contradict it. Bsids, thr was truth in his looks.”

“It is difficult, indd--it is distrssing. On dos not know what to
think.”

“I bg your pardon;--on knows xactly what to think.”

But Jan could think with crtainty on only on point,--that Mr.
Bingly, if h _had bn_ imposd on, would hav much to suffr whn
th affair bcam public.

Th two young ladis wr summond from th shrubbry, whr this
convrsation passd, by th arrival of som of th vry prsons of whom
thy had bn spaking; Mr. Bingly and his sistrs cam to giv thir
prsonal invitation for th long xpctd ball at Nthrfild, which was
fixd for th following Tusday. Th two ladis wr dlightd to s
thir dar frind again, calld it an ag sinc thy had mt, and
rpatdly askd what sh had bn doing with hrslf sinc thir
sparation. To th rst of th family thy paid littl attntion;
avoiding Mrs. Bnnt as much as possibl, saying not much to lizabth,
and nothing at all to th othrs. Thy wr soon gon again, rising from
thir sats with an activity which took thir brothr by surpris, and
hurrying off as if agr to scap from Mrs. Bnnt’s civilitis.

Th prospct of th Nthrfild ball was xtrmly agrabl to vry
fmal of th family. Mrs. Bnnt chos to considr it as givn in
complimnt to hr ldst daughtr, and was particularly flattrd by
rciving th invitation from Mr. Bingly himslf, instad of a
crmonious card. Jan picturd to hrslf a happy vning in th
socity of hr two frinds, and th attntions of thir brothr; and
lizabth thought with plasur of dancing a grat dal with Mr.
Wickham, and of sing a confirmation of vrything in Mr. Darcy’s look
and bhaviour. Th happinss anticipatd by Cathrin and Lydia dpndd
lss on any singl vnt, or any particular prson; for though thy
ach, lik lizabth, mant to danc half th vning with Mr. Wickham,
h was by no mans th only partnr who could satisfy thm, and a ball
was, at any rat, a ball. And vn Mary could assur hr family that sh
had no disinclination for it.

“Whil I can hav my mornings to myslf,” said sh, “it is nough. I
think it is no sacrific to join occasionally in vning ngagmnts.
Socity has claims on us all; and I profss myslf on of thos who
considr intrvals of rcration and amusmnt as dsirabl for
vrybody.”

lizabth’s spirits wr so high on th occasion, that though sh did
not oftn spak unncssarily to Mr. Collins, sh could not hlp asking
him whthr h intndd to accpt Mr. Bingly’s invitation, and if h
did, whthr h would think it propr to join in th vning’s
amusmnt; and sh was rathr surprisd to find that h ntrtaind no
scrupl whatvr on that had, and was vry far from drading a rbuk,
ithr from th Archbishop or Lady Cathrin d Bourgh, by vnturing to
danc.

“I am by no mans of opinion, I assur you,” said h, “that a ball of
this kind, givn by a young man of charactr, to rspctabl popl, can
hav any vil tndncy; and I am so far from objcting to dancing
myslf, that I shall hop to b honourd with th hands of all my fair
cousins in th cours of th vning; and I tak this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss lizabth, for th two first dancs spcially; a
prfrnc which I trust my cousin Jan will attribut to th right
caus, and not to any disrspct for hr.”

lizabth flt hrslf compltly takn in. Sh had fully proposd bing
ngagd by Wickham for thos vry dancs; and to hav Mr. Collins
instad!--hr livlinss had bn nvr wors timd. Thr was no hlp
for it, howvr. Mr. Wickham’s happinss and hr own was prforc
dlayd a littl longr, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accptd with as
good a grac as sh could. Sh was not th bttr plasd with his
gallantry, from th ida it suggstd of somthing mor. It now first
struck hr, that _sh_ was slctd from among hr sistrs as worthy of
bing th mistrss of Hunsford Parsonag, and of assisting to form a
quadrill tabl at Rosings, in th absnc of mor ligibl visitors.
Th ida soon rachd to conviction, as sh obsrvd his incrasing
civilitis towards hrslf, and hard his frqunt attmpt at a
complimnt on hr wit and vivacity; and though mor astonishd than
gratifid hrslf by this ffct of hr charms, it was not long bfor
hr mothr gav hr to undrstand that th probability of thir marriag
was xcdingly agrabl to _hr_. lizabth, howvr, did not choos
to tak th hint, bing wll awar that a srious disput must b th
consqunc of any rply. Mr. Collins might nvr mak th offr, and,
till h did, it was uslss to quarrl about him.

If thr had not bn a Nthrfild ball to prpar for and talk of, th
youngr Miss Bnnts would hav bn in a pitiabl stat at this tim;
for, from th day of th invitation to th day of th ball, thr was
such a succssion of rain as prvntd thir walking to Mryton onc. No
aunt, no officrs, no nws could b sought aftr; th vry sho-ross
for Nthrfild wr got by proxy. vn lizabth might hav found som
trial of hr patinc in wathr which totally suspndd th improvmnt
of hr acquaintanc with Mr. Wickham; and nothing lss than a danc on
Tusday could hav mad such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
ndurabl to Kitty and Lydia.

Till lizabth ntrd th drawing-room at Nthrfild, and lookd in
vain for Mr. Wickham among th clustr of rd coats thr assmbld, a
doubt of his bing prsnt had nvr occurrd to hr. Th crtainty of
mting him had not bn chckd by any of thos rcollctions that
might not unrasonably hav alarmd hr. Sh had drssd with mor than
usual car, and prpard in th highst spirits for th conqust of all
that rmaind unsubdud of his hart, trusting that it was not mor than
might b won in th cours of th vning. But in an instant aros th
dradful suspicion of his bing purposly omittd, for Mr. Darcy’s
plasur, in th Binglys’ invitation to th officrs; and though this
was not xactly th cas, th absolut fact of his absnc was
pronouncd by his frind Mr. Dnny, to whom Lydia agrly applid, and
who told thm that Wickham had bn obligd to go to town on businss
th day bfor, and was not yt rturnd; adding, with a significant
smil,--

“I do not imagin his businss would hav calld him away just now, if
h had not wishd to avoid a crtain gntlman hr.”

This part of his intllignc, though unhard by Lydia, was caught by
lizabth; and, as it assurd hr that Darcy was not lss answrabl for
Wickham’s absnc than if hr first surmis had bn just, vry fling
of displasur against th formr was so sharpnd by immdiat
disappointmnt, that sh could hardly rply with tolrabl civility to
th polit inquiris which h dirctly aftrwards approachd to mak.
Attntion, forbaranc, patinc with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. Sh
was rsolvd against any sort of convrsation with him, and turnd away
with a dgr of ill-humour which sh could not wholly surmount vn in
spaking to Mr. Bingly, whos blind partiality provokd hr.

But lizabth was not formd for ill-humour; and though vry prospct
of hr own was dstroyd for th vning, it could not dwll long on hr
spirits; and, having told all hr grifs to Charlott Lucas, whom sh
had not sn for a wk, sh was soon abl to mak a voluntary
transition to th odditis of hr cousin, and to point him out to hr
particular notic. Th two first dancs, howvr, brought a rturn of
distrss: thy wr dancs of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and
solmn, apologizing instad of attnding, and oftn moving wrong
without bing awar of it, gav hr all th sham and misry which a
disagrabl partnr for a coupl of dancs can giv. Th momnt of hr
rlas from him was cstasy.

Sh dancd nxt with an officr, and had th rfrshmnt of talking of
Wickham, and of haring that h was univrsally likd. Whn thos dancs
wr ovr, sh rturnd to Charlott Lucas, and was in convrsation with
hr, whn sh found hrslf suddnly addrssd by Mr. Darcy, who took
hr so much by surpris in his application for hr hand, that, without
knowing what sh did, sh accptd him. H walkd away again
immdiatly, and sh was lft to frt ovr hr own want of prsnc of
mind: Charlott trid to consol hr.

“I dar say you will find him vry agrabl.”

“Havn forbid! _That_ would b th gratst misfortun of all! To find
a man agrabl whom on is dtrmind to hat! Do not wish m such an
vil.”

Whn th dancing rcommncd, howvr, and Darcy approachd to claim hr
hand, Charlott could not hlp cautioning hr, in a whispr, not to b a
simplton, and allow hr fancy for Wickham to mak hr appar unplasant
in th ys of a man oftn tims his consqunc. lizabth mad no
answr, and took hr plac in th st, amazd at th dignity to which
sh was arrivd in bing allowd to stand opposit to Mr. Darcy, and
rading in hr nighbours’ looks thir qual amazmnt in bholding it.
Thy stood for som tim without spaking a word; and sh bgan to
imagin that thir silnc was to last through th two dancs, and, at
first, was rsolvd not to brak it; till suddnly fancying that it
would b th gratr punishmnt to hr partnr to oblig him to talk,
sh mad som slight obsrvation on th danc. H rplid, and was again
silnt. Aftr a paus of som minuts, sh addrssd him a scond tim,
with--

“It is _your_ turn to say somthing now, Mr. Darcy. _I_ talkd about th
danc, and _you_ ought to mak som kind of rmark on th siz of th
room, or th numbr of coupls.”

H smild, and assurd hr that whatvr sh wishd him to say should b
said.

“Vry wll; that rply will do for th prsnt. Prhaps, by-and-by, I
may obsrv that privat balls ar much plasantr than public ons; but
_now_ w may b silnt.”

“Do you talk by rul, thn, whil you ar dancing?”

“Somtims. On must spak a littl, you know. It would look odd to b
ntirly silnt for half an hour togthr; and yt, for th advantag of
_som_, convrsation ought to b so arrangd as that thy may hav th
troubl of saying as littl as possibl.”

“Ar you consulting your own flings in th prsnt cas, or do you
imagin that you ar gratifying min?”

“Both,” rplid lizabth archly; “for I hav always sn a grat
similarity in th turn of our minds. W ar ach of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to spak, unlss w xpct to say
somthing that will amaz th whol room, and b handd down to
postrity with all th _éclat_ of a provrb.”

“This is no vry striking rsmblanc of your own charactr, I am sur,”
said h. “How nar it may b to _min_, I cannot prtnd to say. _You_
think it a faithful portrait, undoubtdly.”

“I must not dcid on my own prformanc.”

H mad no answr; and thy wr again silnt till thy had gon down
th danc, whn h askd hr if sh and hr sistrs did not vry oftn
walk to Mryton. Sh answrd in th affirmativ; and, unabl to rsist
th tmptation, addd, “Whn you mt us thr th othr day, w had just
bn forming a nw acquaintanc.”

Th ffct was immdiat. A dpr shad of _hautur_ ovrsprad his
faturs, but h said not a word; and lizabth, though blaming hrslf
for hr own waknss, could not go on. At lngth Darcy spok, and in a
constraind mannr said,--

“Mr. Wickham is blssd with such happy mannrs as may insur his
_making_ frinds; whthr h may b qually capabl of _rtaining_ thm,
is lss crtain.”

“H has bn so unlucky as to los your frindship,” rplid lizabth,
with mphasis, “and in a mannr which h is likly to suffr from all
his lif.”

Darcy mad no answr, and smd dsirous of changing th subjct. At
that momnt Sir William Lucas appard clos to thm, maning to pass
through th st to th othr sid of th room; but, on prciving Mr.
Darcy, h stoppd, with a bow of suprior courtsy, to complimnt him on
his dancing and his partnr.

“I hav bn most highly gratifid, indd, my dar sir; such vry
suprior dancing is not oftn sn. It is vidnt that you blong to th
first circls. Allow m to say, howvr, that your fair partnr dos not
disgrac you: and that I must hop to hav this plasur oftn rpatd,
spcially whn a crtain dsirabl vnt, my dar Miss liza (glancing
at hr sistr and Bingly), shall tak plac. What congratulations will
thn flow in! I appal to Mr. Darcy;--but lt m not intrrupt you, sir.
You will not thank m for dtaining you from th bwitching convrs of
that young lady, whos bright ys ar also upbraiding m.”

Th lattr part of this addrss was scarcly hard by Darcy; but Sir
William’s allusion to his frind smd to strik him forcibly, and his
ys wr dirctd, with a vry srious xprssion, towards Bingly and
Jan, who wr dancing togthr. Rcovring himslf, howvr, shortly,
h turnd to his partnr, and said,--

“Sir William’s intrruption has mad m forgt what w wr talking
of.”

“I do not think w wr spaking at all. Sir William could not hav
intrruptd any two popl in th room who had lss to say for
thmslvs. W hav trid two or thr subjcts alrady without succss,
and what w ar to talk of nxt I cannot imagin.”

“What think you of books?” said h, smiling.

“Books--oh no!--I am sur w nvr rad th sam, or not with th sam
flings.”

“I am sorry you think so; but if that b th cas, thr can at last b
no want of subjct. W may compar our diffrnt opinions.”

“No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my had is always full of
somthing ls.”

“Th _prsnt_ always occupis you in such scns--dos it?” said h,
with a look of doubt.

“Ys, always,” sh rplid, without knowing what sh said; for hr
thoughts had wandrd far from th subjct, as soon aftrwards appard
by hr suddnly xclaiming, “I rmmbr haring you onc say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly vr forgav;--that your rsntmnt, onc cratd, was
unappasabl. You ar vry cautious, I suppos, as to its _bing
cratd_?”

“I am,” said h, with a firm voic.

“And nvr allow yourslf to b blindd by prjudic?”

“I hop not.”

“It is particularly incumbnt on thos who nvr chang thir opinion,
to b scur of judging proprly at first.”

“May I ask to what ths qustions tnd?”

“Mrly to th illustration of _your_ charactr,” said sh, ndavouring
to shak off hr gravity. “I am trying to mak it out.”

“And what is your succss?”

Sh shook hr had. “I do not gt on at all. I har such diffrnt
accounts of you as puzzl m xcdingly.”

“I can radily bliv,” answrd h, gravly, “that rports may vary
gratly with rspct to m; and I could wish, Miss Bnnt, that you wr
not to sktch my charactr at th prsnt momnt, as thr is rason to
far that th prformanc would rflct no crdit on ithr.”

“But if I do not tak your liknss now, I may nvr hav anothr
opportunity.”

“I would by no mans suspnd any plasur of yours,” h coldly rplid.
Sh said no mor, and thy wnt down th othr danc and partd in
silnc; on ach sid dissatisfid, though not to an qual dgr; for
in Darcy’s brast thr was a tolrably powrful fling towards hr,
which soon procurd hr pardon, and dirctd all his angr against
anothr.

Thy had not long sparatd whn Miss Bingly cam towards hr, and,
with an xprssion of civil disdain, thus accostd hr,--

“So, Miss liza, I har you ar quit dlightd with Gorg Wickham?
Your sistr has bn talking to m about him, and asking m a thousand
qustions; and I find that th young man forgot to tll you, among his
othr communications, that h was th son of old Wickham, th lat Mr.
Darcy’s stward. Lt m rcommnd you, howvr, as a frind, not to giv
implicit confidnc to all his assrtions; for, as to Mr. Darcy’s using
him ill, it is prfctly fals: for, on th contrary, h has bn always
rmarkably kind to him, though Gorg Wickham has tratd Mr. Darcy in a
most infamous mannr. I do not know th particulars, but I know vry
wll that Mr. Darcy is not in th last to blam; that h cannot bar
to har Gorg Wickham mntiond; and that though my brothr thought h
could not wll avoid including him in his invitation to th officrs, h
was xcssivly glad to find that h had takn himslf out of th way.
His coming into th country at all is a most insolnt thing, indd, and
I wondr how h could prsum to do it. I pity you, Miss liza, for this
discovry of your favourit’s guilt; but rally, considring his
dscnt, on could not xpct much bttr.”

“His guilt and his dscnt appar, by your account, to b th sam,”
said lizabth, angrily; “for I hav hard you accus him of nothing
wors than of bing th son of Mr. Darcy’s stward, and of _that_, I can
assur you, h informd m himslf.”

“I bg your pardon,” rplid Miss Bingly, turning away with a snr.
“xcus my intrfrnc; it was kindly mant.”

“Insolnt girl!” said lizabth to hrslf. “You ar much mistakn if
you xpct to influnc m by such a paltry attack as this. I s
nothing in it but your own wilful ignoranc and th malic of Mr.
Darcy.” Sh thn sought hr ldst sistr, who had undrtakn to mak
inquiris on th sam subjct of Bingly. Jan mt hr with a smil of
such swt complacncy, a glow of such happy xprssion, as sufficintly
markd how wll sh was satisfid with th occurrncs of th vning.
lizabth instantly rad hr flings; and, at that momnt, solicitud
for Wickham, rsntmnt against his nmis, and vrything ls, gav
way bfor th hop of Jan’s bing in th fairst way for happinss.

“I want to know,” said sh, with a countnanc no lss smiling than hr
sistr’s, “what you hav larnt about Mr. Wickham. But prhaps you hav
bn too plasantly ngagd to think of any third prson, in which cas
you may b sur of my pardon.”

“No,” rplid Jan, “I hav not forgottn him; but I hav nothing
satisfactory to tll you. Mr. Bingly dos not know th whol of his
history, and is quit ignorant of th circumstancs which hav
principally offndd Mr. Darcy; but h will vouch for th good conduct,
th probity and honour, of his frind, and is prfctly convincd that
Mr. Wickham has dsrvd much lss attntion from Mr. Darcy than h has
rcivd; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as wll as his
sistr’s, Mr. Wickham is by no mans a rspctabl young man. I am
afraid h has bn vry imprudnt, and has dsrvd to los Mr. Darcy’s
rgard.”

“Mr. Bingly dos not know Mr. Wickham himslf.”

“No; h nvr saw him till th othr morning at Mryton.”

“This account thn is what h has rcivd from Mr. Darcy. I am
prfctly satisfid. But what dos h say of th living?”

“H dos not xactly rcollct th circumstancs, though h has hard
thm from Mr. Darcy mor than onc, but h blivs that it was lft to
him _conditionally_ only.”

“I hav not a doubt of Mr. Bingly’s sincrity,” said lizabth warmly,
“but you must xcus my not bing convincd by assurancs only. Mr.
Bingly’s dfnc of his frind was a vry abl on, I dar say; but
sinc h is unacquaintd with svral parts of th story, and has larnt
th rst from that frind himslf, I shall vntur still to think of
both gntlmn as I did bfor.”

Sh thn changd th discours to on mor gratifying to ach, and on
which thr could b no diffrnc of sntimnt. lizabth listnd with
dlight to th happy though modst hops which Jan ntrtaind of
Bingly’s rgard, and said all in hr powr to hightn hr confidnc
in it. On thir bing joind by Mr. Bingly himslf, lizabth withdrw
to Miss Lucas; to whos inquiry aftr th plasantnss of hr last
partnr sh had scarcly rplid, bfor Mr. Collins cam up to thm,
and told hr with grat xultation, that h had just bn so fortunat
as to mak a most important discovry.

“I hav found out,” said h, “by a singular accidnt, that thr is now
in th room a nar rlation to my patronss. I happnd to ovrhar th
gntlman himslf mntioning to th young lady who dos th honours of
this hous th nams of his cousin Miss D Bourgh, and of hr mothr,
Lady Cathrin. How wondrfully ths sort of things occur! Who would
hav thought of my mting with--prhaps--a nphw of Lady Cathrin d
Bourgh in this assmbly! I am most thankful that th discovry is mad
in tim for m to pay my rspcts to him, which I am now going to do,
and trust h will xcus my not having don it bfor. My total
ignoranc of th connction must plad my apology.”

“You ar not going to introduc yourslf to Mr. Darcy?”

“Indd I am. I shall ntrat his pardon for not having don it arlir.
I bliv him to b Lady Cathrin’s _nphw_. It will b in my powr to
assur him that hr Ladyship was quit wll ystrday s’nnight.”

lizabth trid hard to dissuad him from such a schm; assuring him
that Mr. Darcy would considr his addrssing him without introduction as
an imprtinnt frdom, rathr than a complimnt to his aunt; that it
was not in th last ncssary thr should b any notic on ithr
sid, and that if it wr, it must blong to Mr. Darcy, th suprior in
consqunc, to bgin th acquaintanc. Mr. Collins listnd to hr with
th dtrmind air of following his own inclination, and whn sh casd
spaking, rplid thus,--

“My dar Miss lizabth, I hav th highst opinion in th world of your
xcllnt judgmnt in all mattrs within th scop of your
undrstanding, but prmit m to say that thr must b a wid diffrnc
btwn th stablishd forms of crmony amongst th laity and thos
which rgulat th clrgy; for, giv m lav to obsrv that I considr
th clrical offic as qual in point of dignity with th highst rank
in th kingdom--providd that a propr humility of bhaviour is at th
sam tim maintaind. You must, thrfor, allow m to follow th
dictats of my conscinc on this occasion, which lad m to prform
what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon m for nglcting to profit by
your advic, which on vry othr subjct shall b my constant guid,
though in th cas bfor us I considr myslf mor fittd by ducation
and habitual study to dcid on what is right than a young lady lik
yourslf;” and with a low bow h lft hr to attack Mr. Darcy, whos
rcption of his advancs sh agrly watchd, and whos astonishmnt at
bing so addrssd was vry vidnt. Hr cousin prfacd his spch with
a solmn bow, and though sh could not har a word of it, sh flt as if
haring it all, and saw in th motion of his lips th words “apology,”
“Hunsford,” and “Lady Cathrin d Bourgh.” It vxd hr to s him
xpos himslf to such a man. Mr. Darcy was ying him with
unrstraind wondr; and whn at last Mr. Collins allowd him to spak,
rplid with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, howvr, was not
discouragd from spaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contmpt smd
abundantly incrasing with th lngth of his scond spch; and at th
nd of it h only mad him a slight bow, and movd anothr way: Mr.
Collins thn rturnd to lizabth.

“I hav no rason, I assur you,” said h, “to b dissatisfid with my
rcption. Mr. Darcy smd much plasd with th attntion. H answrd
m with th utmost civility, and vn paid m th complimnt of saying,
that h was so wll convincd of Lady Cathrin’s discrnmnt as to b
crtain sh could nvr bstow a favour unworthily. It was rally a vry
handsom thought. Upon th whol, I am much plasd with him.”

As lizabth had no longr any intrst of hr own to pursu, sh turnd
hr attntion almost ntirly on hr sistr and Mr. Bingly; and th
train of agrabl rflctions which hr obsrvations gav birth to mad
hr prhaps almost as happy as Jan. Sh saw hr in ida sttld in that
vry hous, in all th flicity which a marriag of tru affction could
bstow; and sh flt capabl, undr such circumstancs, of ndavouring
vn to lik Bingly’s two sistrs. Hr mothr’s thoughts sh plainly
saw wr bnt th sam way, and sh dtrmind not to vntur nar hr,
lst sh might har too much. Whn thy sat down to suppr, thrfor,
sh considrd it a most unlucky prvrsnss which placd thm within
on of ach othr; and dply was sh vxd to find that hr mothr was
talking to that on prson (Lady Lucas) frly, opnly, and of nothing
ls but of hr xpctation that Jan would b soon marrid to Mr.
Bingly. It was an animating subjct, and Mrs. Bnnt smd incapabl
of fatigu whil numrating th advantags of th match. His bing such
a charming young man, and so rich, and living but thr mils from thm,
wr th first points of slf-gratulation; and thn it was such a
comfort to think how fond th two sistrs wr of Jan, and to b
crtain that thy must dsir th connction as much as sh could do. It
was, morovr, such a promising thing for hr youngr daughtrs, as
Jan’s marrying so gratly must throw thm in th way of othr rich mn;
and, lastly, it was so plasant at hr tim of lif to b abl to
consign hr singl daughtrs to th car of thir sistr, that sh might
not b obligd to go into company mor than sh likd. It was ncssary
to mak this circumstanc a mattr of plasur, bcaus on such
occasions it is th tiqutt; but no on was lss likly than Mrs.
Bnnt to find comfort in staying at hom at any priod of hr lif. Sh
concludd with many good wishs that Lady Lucas might soon b qually
fortunat, though vidntly and triumphantly bliving thr was no
chanc of it.

In vain did lizabth ndavour to chck th rapidity of hr mothr’s
words, or prsuad hr to dscrib hr flicity in a lss audibl
whispr; for to hr inxprssibl vxation sh could prciv that th
chif of it was ovrhard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposit to thm. Hr
mothr only scoldd hr for bing nonsnsical.

“What is Mr. Darcy to m, pray, that I should b afraid of him? I am
sur w ow him no such particular civility as to b obligd to say
nothing _h_ may not lik to har.”

“For havn’s sak, madam, spak lowr. What advantag can it b to you
to offnd Mr. Darcy? You will nvr rcommnd yourslf to his frind by
so doing.”

Nothing that sh could say, howvr, had any influnc. Hr mothr would
talk of hr viws in th sam intlligibl ton. lizabth blushd and
blushd again with sham and vxation. Sh could not hlp frquntly
glancing hr y at Mr. Darcy, though vry glanc convincd hr of what
sh dradd; for though h was not always looking at hr mothr, sh was
convincd that his attntion was invariably fixd by hr. Th xprssion
of his fac changd gradually from indignant contmpt to a composd and
stady gravity.

At lngth, howvr, Mrs. Bnnt had no mor to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had bn long yawning at th rptition of dlights which sh saw no
liklihood of sharing, was lft to th comforts of cold ham and chickn.
lizabth now bgan to rviv. But not long was th intrval of
tranquillity; for whn suppr was ovr, singing was talkd of, and sh
had th mortification of sing Mary, aftr vry littl ntraty,
prparing to oblig th company. By many significant looks and silnt
ntratis did sh ndavour to prvnt such a proof of
complaisanc,--but in vain; Mary would not undrstand thm; such an
opportunity of xhibiting was dlightful to hr, and sh bgan hr song.
lizabth’s ys wr fixd on hr, with most painful snsations; and
sh watchd hr progrss through th svral stanzas with an impatinc
which was vry ill rwardd at thir clos; for Mary, on rciving
amongst th thanks of th tabl th hint of a hop that sh might b
prvaild on to favour thm again, aftr th paus of half a minut
bgan anothr. Mary’s powrs wr by no mans fittd for such a display;
hr voic was wak, and hr mannr affctd. lizabth was in agonis.
Sh lookd at Jan to s how sh bor it; but Jan was vry composdly
talking to Bingly. Sh lookd at his two sistrs, and saw thm making
signs of drision at ach othr, and at Darcy, who continud, howvr,
impntrably grav. Sh lookd at hr fathr to ntrat his
intrfrnc, lst Mary should b singing all night. H took th hint,
and, whn Mary had finishd hr scond song, said aloud,--

“That will do xtrmly wll, child. You hav dlightd us long nough.
Lt th othr young ladis hav tim to xhibit.”

Mary, though prtnding not to har, was somwhat disconcrtd; and
lizabth, sorry for hr, and sorry for hr fathr’s spch, was afraid
hr anxity had don no good. Othrs of th party wr now applid to.

“If I,” said Mr. Collins, “wr so fortunat as to b abl to sing, I
should hav grat plasur, I am sur, in obliging th company with an
air; for I considr music as a vry innocnt divrsion, and prfctly
compatibl with th profssion of a clrgyman. I do not man, howvr,
to assrt that w can b justifid in dvoting too much of our tim to
music, for thr ar crtainly othr things to b attndd to. Th
rctor of a parish has much to do. In th first plac, h must mak such
an agrmnt for tiths as may b bnficial to himslf and not
offnsiv to his patron. H must writ his own srmons; and th tim
that rmains will not b too much for his parish dutis, and th car
and improvmnt of his dwlling, which h cannot b xcusd from making
as comfortabl as possibl. And I do not think it of light importanc
that h should hav attntiv and conciliatory mannrs towards
vrybody, spcially towards thos to whom h ows his prfrmnt. I
cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think wll of th man who
should omit an occasion of tstifying his rspct towards anybody
connctd with th family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, h concludd
his spch, which had bn spokn so loud as to b hard by half th
room. Many stard--many smild; but no on lookd mor amusd than Mr.
Bnnt himslf, whil his wif sriously commndd Mr. Collins for
having spokn so snsibly, and obsrvd, in a half-whispr to Lady
Lucas, that h was a rmarkably clvr, good kind of young man.

To lizabth it appard, that had hr family mad an agrmnt to
xpos thmslvs as much as thy could during th vning, it would
hav bn impossibl for thm to play thir parts with mor spirit, or
finr succss; and happy did sh think it for Bingly and hr sistr
that som of th xhibition had scapd his notic, and that his
flings wr not of a sort to b much distrssd by th folly which h
must hav witnssd. That his two sistrs and Mr. Darcy, howvr, should
hav such an opportunity of ridiculing hr rlations was bad nough; and
sh could not dtrmin whthr th silnt contmpt of th gntlman, or
th insolnt smils of th ladis, wr mor intolrabl.

Th rst of th vning brought hr littl amusmnt. Sh was tasd by
Mr. Collins, who continud most prsvringly by hr sid; and though h
could not prvail with hr to danc with him again, put it out of hr
powr to danc with othrs. In vain did sh ntrat him to stand up with
sombody ls, and offrd to introduc him to any young lady in th
room. H assurd hr that, as to dancing, h was prfctly indiffrnt
to it; that his chif objct was, by dlicat attntions, to rcommnd
himslf to hr; and that h should thrfor mak a point of rmaining
clos to hr th whol vning. Thr was no arguing upon such a
projct. Sh owd hr gratst rlif to hr frind Miss Lucas, who
oftn joind thm, and good-naturdly ngagd Mr. Collins’s convrsation
to hrslf.

Sh was at last fr from th offnc of Mr. Darcy’s furthr notic:
though oftn standing within a vry short distanc of hr, quit
disngagd, h nvr cam nar nough to spak. Sh flt it to b th
probabl consqunc of hr allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rjoicd in
it.

Th Longbourn party wr th last of all th company to dpart; and by a
manœuvr of Mrs. Bnnt had to wait for thir carriag a quartr of an
hour aftr vrybody ls was gon, which gav thm tim to s how
hartily thy wr wishd away by som of th family. Mrs. Hurst and hr
sistr scarcly opnd thir mouths xcpt to complain of fatigu, and
wr vidntly impatint to hav th hous to thmslvs. Thy rpulsd
vry attmpt of Mrs. Bnnt at convrsation, and, by so doing, thrw a
languor ovr th whol party, which was vry littl rlivd by th long
spchs of Mr. Collins, who was complimnting Mr. Bingly and his
sistrs on th lganc of thir ntrtainmnt, and th hospitality and
politnss which had markd thir bhaviour to thir gusts. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bnnt, in qual silnc, was njoying th scn.
Mr. Bingly and Jan wr standing togthr a littl dtachd from th
rst, and talkd only to ach othr. lizabth prsrvd as stady a
silnc as ithr Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingly; and vn Lydia was too
much fatigud to uttr mor than th occasional xclamation of “Lord,
how tird I am!” accompanid by a violnt yawn.

Whn at lngth thy aros to tak lav, Mrs. Bnnt was most prssingly
civil in hr hop of sing th whol family soon at Longbourn; and
addrssd hrslf particularly to Mr. Bingly, to assur him how happy
h would mak thm, by ating a family dinnr with thm at any tim,
without th crmony of a formal invitation. Bingly was all gratful
plasur; and h radily ngagd for taking th arlist opportunity of
waiting on hr aftr his rturn from London, whithr h was obligd to
go th nxt day for a short tim.

Mrs. Bnnt was prfctly satisfid; and quittd th hous undr th
dlightful prsuasion that, allowing for th ncssary prparations of
sttlmnts, nw carriags, and wdding cloths, sh should undoubtdly
s hr daughtr sttld at Nthrfild in th cours of thr or four
months. Of having anothr daughtr marrid to Mr. Collins sh thought
with qual crtainty, and with considrabl, though not qual, plasur.
lizabth was th last dar to hr of all hr childrn; and though th
man and th match wr quit good nough for _hr_, th worth of ach
was clipsd by Mr. Bingly and Nthrfild.

Th nxt day opnd a nw scn at Longbourn. Mr. Collins mad his
dclaration in form. Having rsolvd to do it without loss of tim, as
his lav of absnc xtndd only to th following Saturday, and having
no flings of diffidnc to mak it distrssing to himslf vn at th
momnt, h st about it in a vry ordrly mannr, with all th
obsrvancs which h supposd a rgular part of th businss. On finding
Mrs. Bnnt, lizabth, and on of th youngr girls togthr, soon
aftr brakfast, h addrssd th mothr in ths words,--

“May I hop, madam, for your intrst with your fair daughtr lizabth,
whn I solicit for th honour of a privat audinc with hr in th
cours of this morning?”

Bfor lizabth had tim for anything but a blush of surpris, Mrs.
Bnnt instantly answrd,--

“Oh dar! Ys, crtainly. I am sur Lizzy will b vry happy--I am sur
sh can hav no objction. Com, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And
gathring hr work togthr, sh was hastning away, whn lizabth
calld out,--

“Dar ma’am, do not go. I bg you will not go. Mr. Collins must xcus
m. H can hav nothing to say to m that anybody nd not har. I am
going away myslf.”

“No, no, nonsns, Lizzy. I dsir you will stay whr you ar.” And
upon lizabth’s sming rally, with vxd and mbarrassd looks, about
to scap, sh addd, “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and haring
Mr. Collins.”

lizabth would not oppos such an injunction; and a momnt’s
considration making hr also snsibl that it would b wisst to gt it
ovr as soon and as quitly as possibl, sh sat down again, and trid
to concal, by incssant mploymnt, th flings which wr dividd
btwn distrss and divrsion. Mrs. Bnnt and Kitty walkd off, and as
soon as thy wr gon, Mr. Collins bgan,--

“Bliv m, my dar Miss lizabth, that your modsty, so far from
doing you any dissrvic, rathr adds to your othr prfctions. You
would hav bn lss amiabl in my ys had thr _not_ bn this littl
unwillingnss; but allow m to assur you that I hav your rspctd
mothr’s prmission for this addrss. You can hardly doubt th purport
of my discours, howvr your natural dlicacy may lad you to
dissmbl; my attntions hav bn too markd to b mistakn. Almost as
soon as I ntrd th hous I singld you out as th companion of my
futur lif. But bfor I am run away with by my flings on this
subjct, prhaps it will b advisabl for m to stat my rasons for
marrying--and, morovr, for coming into Hrtfordshir with th dsign
of slcting a wif, as I crtainly did.”

Th ida of Mr. Collins, with all his solmn composur, bing run away
with by his flings, mad lizabth so nar laughing that sh could not
us th short paus h allowd in any attmpt to stop him farthr, and
h continud,--

“My rasons for marrying ar, first, that I think it a right thing for
vry clrgyman in asy circumstancs (lik myslf) to st th xampl
of matrimony in his parish; scondly, that I am convincd it will add
vry gratly to my happinss; and, thirdly, which prhaps I ought to
hav mntiond arlir, that it is th particular advic and
rcommndation of th vry nobl lady whom I hav th honour of calling
patronss. Twic has sh condscndd to giv m hr opinion (unaskd
too!) on this subjct; and it was but th vry Saturday night bfor I
lft Hunsford,--btwn our pools at quadrill, whil Mrs. Jnkinson was
arranging Miss D Bourgh’s footstool,--that sh said, ‘Mr. Collins, you
must marry. A clrgyman lik you must marry. Choos proprly, choos a
gntlwoman for _my_ sak, and for your _own_; lt hr b an activ,
usful sort of prson, not brought up high, but abl to mak a small
incom go a good way. This is my advic. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring hr to Hunsford, and I will visit hr.’ Allow m, by th
way, to obsrv, my fair cousin, that I do not rckon th notic and
kindnss of Lady Cathrin d Bourgh as among th last of th
advantags in my powr to offr. You will find hr mannrs byond
anything I can dscrib; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must b
accptabl to hr, spcially whn tmprd with th silnc and rspct
which hr rank will invitably xcit. Thus much for my gnral
intntion in favour of matrimony; it rmains to b told why my viws
wr dirctd to Longbourn instad of my own nighbourhood, whr I
assur you thr ar many amiabl young womn. But th fact is, that
bing, as I am, to inhrit this stat aftr th dath of your honourd
fathr (who, howvr, may liv many yars longr), I could not satisfy
myslf without rsolving to choos a wif from among his daughtrs, that
th loss to thm might b as littl as possibl whn th mlancholy
vnt taks plac--which, howvr, as I hav alrady said, may not b
for svral yars. This has bn my motiv, my fair cousin, and I
flattr myslf it will not sink m in your stm. And now nothing
rmains for m but to assur you in th most animatd languag of th
violnc of my affction. To fortun I am prfctly indiffrnt, and
shall mak no dmand of that natur on your fathr, sinc I am wll
awar that it could not b complid with; and that on thousand pounds
in th 4 pr cnts., which will not b yours till aftr your mothr’s
dcas, is all that you may vr b ntitld to. On that had,
thrfor, I shall b uniformly silnt: and you may assur yourslf that
no ungnrous rproach shall vr pass my lips whn w ar marrid.”

It was absolutly ncssary to intrrupt him now.

“You ar too hasty, sir,” sh crid. “You forgt that I hav mad no
answr. Lt m do it without furthr loss of tim. Accpt my thanks for
th complimnt you ar paying m. I am vry snsibl of th honour of
your proposals, but it is impossibl for m to do othrwis than dclin
thm.”

“I am not now to larn,” rplid Mr. Collins, with a formal wav of th
hand, “that it is usual with young ladis to rjct th addrsss of th
man whom thy scrtly man to accpt, whn h first applis for thir
favour; and that somtims th rfusal is rpatd a scond or vn a
third tim. I am, thrfor, by no mans discouragd by what you hav
just said, and shall hop to lad you to th altar r long.”

“Upon my word, sir,” crid lizabth, “your hop is rathr an
xtraordinary on aftr my dclaration. I do assur you that I am not
on of thos young ladis (if such young ladis thr ar) who ar so
daring as to risk thir happinss on th chanc of bing askd a scond
tim. I am prfctly srious in my rfusal. You could not mak _m_
happy, and I am convincd that I am th last woman in th world who
would mak _you_ so. Nay, wr your frind Lady Cathrin to know m, I
am prsuadd sh would find m in vry rspct ill qualifid for th
situation.”

“Wr it crtain that Lady Cathrin would think so,” said Mr. Collins,
vry gravly--“but I cannot imagin that hr Ladyship would at all
disapprov of you. And you may b crtain that whn I hav th honour of
sing hr again I shall spak in th highst trms of your modsty,
conomy, and othr amiabl qualifications.”

“Indd, Mr. Collins, all prais of m will b unncssary. You must
giv m lav to judg for myslf, and pay m th complimnt of
bliving what I say. I wish you vry happy and vry rich, and by
rfusing your hand, do all in my powr to prvnt your bing othrwis.
In making m th offr, you must hav satisfid th dlicacy of your
flings with rgard to my family, and may tak possssion of Longbourn
stat whnvr it falls, without any slf-rproach. This mattr may b
considrd, thrfor, as finally sttld.” And rising as sh thus
spok, sh would hav quittd th room, had not Mr. Collins thus
addrssd hr,--

“Whn I do myslf th honour of spaking to you nxt on th subjct, I
shall hop to rciv a mor favourabl answr than you hav now givn
m; though I am far from accusing you of crulty at prsnt, bcaus I
know it to b th stablishd custom of your sx to rjct a man on th
first application, and, prhaps, you hav vn now said as much to
ncourag my suit as would b consistnt with th tru dlicacy of th
fmal charactr.”

“Rally, Mr. Collins,” crid lizabth, with som warmth, “you puzzl m
xcdingly. If what I hav hithrto said can appar to you in th form
of ncouragmnt, I know not how to xprss my rfusal in such a way as
may convinc you of its bing on.”

“You must giv m lav to flattr myslf, my dar cousin, that your
rfusal of my addrsss ar mrly words of cours. My rasons for
bliving it ar brifly ths:--It dos not appar to m that my hand
is unworthy your accptanc, or that th stablishmnt I can offr would
b any othr than highly dsirabl. My situation in lif, my connctions
with th family of D Bourgh, and my rlationship to your own, ar
circumstancs highly in my favour; and you should tak it into furthr
considration that, in spit of your manifold attractions, it is by no
mans crtain that anothr offr of marriag may vr b mad you. Your
portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all liklihood undo th
ffcts of your lovlinss and amiabl qualifications. As I must,
thrfor, conclud that you ar not srious in your rjction of m, I
shall choos to attribut it to your wish of incrasing my lov by
suspns, according to th usual practic of lgant fmals.”

“I do assur you, sir, that I hav no prtnsions whatvr to that kind
of lganc which consists in tormnting a rspctabl man. I would
rathr b paid th complimnt of bing blivd sincr. I thank you
again and again for th honour you hav don m in your proposals, but
to accpt thm is absolutly impossibl. My flings in vry rspct
forbid it. Can I spak plainr? Do not considr m now as an lgant
fmal intnding to plagu you, but as a rational cratur spaking th
truth from hr hart.”

“You ar uniformly charming!” crid h, with an air of awkward
gallantry; “and I am prsuadd that, whn sanctiond by th xprss
authority of both your xcllnt parnts, my proposals will not fail of
bing accptabl.”

To such prsvranc in wilful slf-dcption lizabth would mak no
rply, and immdiatly and in silnc withdrw; dtrmind, that if h
prsistd in considring hr rpatd rfusals as flattring
ncouragmnt, to apply to hr fathr, whos ngativ might b uttrd
in such a mannr as must b dcisiv, and whos bhaviour at last could
not b mistakn for th affctation and coqutry of an lgant fmal.

Mr. Collins was not lft long to th silnt contmplation of his
succssful lov; for Mrs. Bnnt, having dawdld about in th vstibul
to watch for th nd of th confrnc, no soonr saw lizabth opn th
door and with quick stp pass hr towards th staircas, than sh
ntrd th brakfast-room, and congratulatd both him and hrslf in
warm trms on th happy prospct of thir narr connction. Mr. Collins
rcivd and rturnd ths flicitations with qual plasur, and thn
procdd to rlat th particulars of thir intrviw, with th rsult
of which h trustd h had vry rason to b satisfid, sinc th
rfusal which his cousin had stadfastly givn him would naturally flow
from hr bashful modsty and th gnuin dlicacy of hr charactr.

This information, howvr, startld Mrs. Bnnt: sh would hav bn
glad to b qually satisfid that hr daughtr had mant to ncourag
him by protsting against his proposals, but sh dard not bliv it,
and could not hlp saying so.

“But dpnd upon it, Mr. Collins,” sh addd, “that Lizzy shall b
brought to rason. I will spak to hr about it myslf dirctly. Sh is
a vry hadstrong, foolish girl, and dos not know hr own intrst; but
I will _mak_ hr know it.”

“Pardon m for intrrupting you, madam,” crid Mr. Collins; “but if sh
is rally hadstrong and foolish, I know not whthr sh would
altogthr b a vry dsirabl wif to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happinss in th marriag stat. If, thrfor, sh
actually prsists in rjcting my suit, prhaps it wr bttr not to
forc hr into accpting m, bcaus, if liabl to such dfcts of
tmpr, sh could not contribut much to my flicity.”

“Sir, you quit misundrstand m,” said Mrs. Bnnt, alarmd. “Lizzy is
only hadstrong in such mattrs as ths. In vrything ls sh is as
good-naturd a girl as vr livd. I will go dirctly to Mr. Bnnt, and
w shall vry soon sttl it with hr, I am sur.”

Sh would not giv him tim to rply, but hurrying instantly to hr
husband, calld out, as sh ntrd th library,--

“Oh, Mr. Bnnt, you ar wantd immdiatly; w ar all in an uproar.
You must com and mak Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for sh vows sh will
not hav him; and if you do not mak hast h will chang his mind and
not hav _hr_.”

Mr. Bnnt raisd his ys from his book as sh ntrd, and fixd thm
on hr fac with a calm unconcrn, which was not in th last altrd by
hr communication.

“I hav not th plasur of undrstanding you,” said h, whn sh had
finishd hr spch. “Of what ar you talking?”

“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy dclars sh will not hav Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins bgins to say that h will not hav Lizzy.”

“And what am I to do on th occasion? It sms a hoplss businss.”

“Spak to Lizzy about it yourslf. Tll hr that you insist upon hr
marrying him.”

“Lt hr b calld down. Sh shall har my opinion.”

Mrs. Bnnt rang th bll, and Miss lizabth was summond to th
library.

“Com hr, child,” crid hr fathr as sh appard. “I hav snt for
you on an affair of importanc. I undrstand that Mr. Collins has mad
you an offr of marriag. Is it tru?”

lizabth rplid that it was.

“Vry wll--and this offr of marriag you hav rfusd?”

“I hav, sir.”

“Vry wll. W now com to th point. Your mothr insists upon your
accpting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bnnt?”

“Ys, or I will nvr s hr again.”

“An unhappy altrnativ is bfor you, lizabth. From this day you must
b a strangr to on of your parnts. Your mothr will nvr s you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will nvr s you again
if you _do_.”

lizabth could not but smil at such a conclusion of such a bginning;
but Mrs. Bnnt, who had prsuadd hrslf that hr husband rgardd th
affair as sh wishd, was xcssivly disappointd.

“What do you man, Mr. Bnnt, by talking in this way? You promisd m
to _insist_ upon hr marrying him.”

“My dar,” rplid hr husband, “I hav two small favours to rqust.
First, that you will allow m th fr us of my undrstanding on th
prsnt occasion; and, scondly, of my room. I shall b glad to hav th
library to myslf as soon as may b.”

Not yt, howvr, in spit of hr disappointmnt in hr husband, did
Mrs. Bnnt giv up th point. Sh talkd to lizabth again and again;
coaxd and thratnd hr by turns. Sh ndavourd to scur Jan in
hr intrst, but Jan, with all possibl mildnss, dclind
intrfring; and lizabth, somtims with ral arnstnss, and
somtims with playful gaity, rplid to hr attacks. Though hr mannr
varid, howvr, hr dtrmination nvr did.

Mr. Collins, manwhil, was mditating in solitud on what had passd.
H thought too wll of himslf to comprhnd on what motiv his cousin
could rfus him; and though his prid was hurt, h suffrd in no othr
way. His rgard for hr was quit imaginary; and th possibility of hr
dsrving hr mothr’s rproach prvntd his fling any rgrt.

Whil th family wr in this confusion, Charlott Lucas cam to spnd
th day with thm. Sh was mt in th vstibul by Lydia, who, flying to
hr, crid in a half whispr, “I am glad you ar com, for thr is such
fun hr! What do you think has happnd this morning? Mr. Collins has
mad an offr to Lizzy, and sh will not hav him.”

Charlott had hardly tim to answr bfor thy wr joind by Kitty,
who cam to tll th sam nws; and no soonr had thy ntrd th
brakfast-room, whr Mrs. Bnnt was alon, than sh likwis bgan on
th subjct, calling on Miss Lucas for hr compassion, and ntrating
hr to prsuad hr frind Lizzy to comply with th wishs of hr
family. “Pray do, my dar Miss Lucas,” sh addd, in a mlancholy ton;
“for nobody is on my sid, nobody taks part with m; I am crully usd,
nobody fls for my poor nrvs.”

Charlott’s rply was spard by th ntranc of Jan and lizabth.

“Ay, thr sh coms,” continud Mrs. Bnnt, “looking as unconcrnd as
may b, and caring no mor for us than if w wr at York, providd sh
can hav hr own way. But I tll you what, Miss Lizzy, if you tak it
into your had to go on rfusing vry offr of marriag in this way,
you will nvr gt a husband at all--and I am sur I do not know who is
to maintain you whn your fathr is dad. _I_ shall not b abl to kp
you--and so I warn you. I hav don with you from this vry day. I told
you in th library, you know, that I should nvr spak to you again,
and you will find m as good as my word. I hav no plasur in talking
to undutiful childrn. Not that I hav much plasur, indd, in talking
to anybody. Popl who suffr as I do from nrvous complaints can hav
no grat inclination for talking. Nobody can tll what I suffr! But it
is always so. Thos who do not complain ar nvr pitid.”

Hr daughtrs listnd in silnc to this ffusion, snsibl that any
attmpt to rason with or sooth hr would only incras th irritation.
Sh talkd on, thrfor, without intrruption from any of thm till
thy wr joind by Mr. Collins, who ntrd with an air mor statly
than usual, and on prciving whom, sh said to th girls,--

“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongus, and
lt Mr. Collins and m hav a littl convrsation togthr.”

lizabth passd quitly out of th room, Jan and Kitty followd, but
Lydia stood hr ground, dtrmind to har all sh could; and Charlott,
dtaind first by th civility of Mr. Collins, whos inquiris aftr
hrslf and all hr family wr vry minut, and thn by a littl
curiosity, satisfid hrslf with walking to th window and prtnding
not to har. In a dolful voic Mrs. Bnnt thus bgan th projctd
convrsation:--

“Oh, Mr. Collins!”

“My dar madam,” rplid h, “lt us b for vr silnt on this point.
Far b it from m,” h prsntly continud, in a voic that markd his
displasur, “to rsnt th bhaviour of your daughtr. Rsignation to
invitabl vils is th duty of us all: th pculiar duty of a young man
who has bn so fortunat as I hav bn, in arly prfrmnt; and, I
trust, I am rsignd. Prhaps not th lss so from fling a doubt of my
positiv happinss had my fair cousin honourd m with hr hand; for I
hav oftn obsrvd, that rsignation is nvr so prfct as whn th
blssing dnid bgins to los somwhat of its valu in our stimation.
You will not, I hop, considr m as showing any disrspct to your
family, my dar madam, by thus withdrawing my prtnsions to your
daughtr’s favour, without having paid yourslf and Mr. Bnnt th
complimnt of rqusting you to intrpos your authority in my bhalf.
My conduct may, I far, b objctionabl in having accptd my
dismission from your daughtr’s lips instad of your own; but w ar all
liabl to rror. I hav crtainly mant wll through th whol affair.
My objct has bn to scur an amiabl companion for myslf, with du
considration for th advantag of all your family; and if my _mannr_
has bn at all rprhnsibl, I hr bg lav to apologiz.”

Th discussion of Mr. Collins’s offr was now narly at an nd, and
lizabth had only to suffr from th uncomfortabl flings ncssarily
attnding it, and occasionally from som pvish allusion of hr mothr.
As for th gntlman himslf, _his_ flings wr chifly xprssd, not
by mbarrassmnt or djction, or by trying to avoid hr, but by
stiffnss of mannr and rsntful silnc. H scarcly vr spok to
hr; and th assiduous attntions which h had bn so snsibl of
himslf wr transfrrd for th rst of th day to Miss Lucas, whos
civility in listning to him was a sasonabl rlif to thm all, and
spcially to hr frind.

Th morrow producd no abatmnt of Mrs. Bnnt’s ill humour or ill
halth. Mr. Collins was also in th sam stat of angry prid. lizabth
had hopd that his rsntmnt might shortn his visit, but his plan did
not appar in th last affctd by it. H was always to hav gon on
Saturday, and to Saturday h still mant to stay.

Aftr brakfast, th girls walkd to Mryton, to inquir if Mr. Wickham
wr rturnd, and to lamnt ovr his absnc from th Nthrfild ball.
H joind thm on thir ntring th town, and attndd thm to thir
aunt’s, whr his rgrt and vxation and th concrn of vrybody wr
wll talkd ovr. To lizabth, howvr, h voluntarily acknowldgd
that th ncssity of his absnc _had_ bn slf-imposd.

“I found,” said h, “as th tim drw nar, that I had bttr not mt
Mr. Darcy;--that to b in th sam room, th sam party with him for so
many hours togthr, might b mor than I could bar, and that scns
might aris unplasant to mor than myslf.”

Sh highly approvd his forbaranc; and thy had lisur for a full
discussion of it, and for all th commndations which thy civilly
bstowd on ach othr, as Wickham and anothr officr walkd back with
thm to Longbourn, and during th walk h particularly attndd to hr.
His accompanying thm was a doubl advantag: sh flt all th
complimnt it offrd to hrslf; and it was most accptabl as an
occasion of introducing him to hr fathr and mothr.

Soon aftr thir rturn, a lttr was dlivrd to Miss Bnnt; it cam
from Nthrfild, and was opnd immdiatly. Th nvlop containd a
sht of lgant, littl, hot-prssd papr, wll covrd with a lady’s
fair, flowing hand; and lizabth saw hr sistr’s countnanc chang as
sh rad it, and saw hr dwlling intntly on som particular passags.
Jan rcollctd hrslf soon; and putting th lttr away, trid to
join, with hr usual chrfulnss, in th gnral convrsation: but
lizabth flt an anxity on th subjct which drw off hr attntion
vn from Wickham; and no soonr had h and his companion takn lav,
than a glanc from Jan invitd hr to follow hr upstairs. Whn thy
had gaind thir own room, Jan, taking out hr lttr, said, “This is
from Carolin Bingly: what it contains has surprisd m a good dal.
Th whol party hav lft Nthrfild by this tim, and ar on thir way
to town; and without any intntion of coming back again. You shall har
what sh says.”

Sh thn rad th first sntnc aloud, which comprisd th information
of thir having just rsolvd to follow thir brothr to town dirctly,
and of thir maning to din that day in Grosvnor Strt, whr Mr.
Hurst had a hous. Th nxt was in ths words:--“‘I do not prtnd to
rgrt anything I shall lav in Hrtfordshir xcpt your socity, my
darst frind; but w will hop, at som futur priod, to njoy many
rturns of that dlightful intrcours w hav known, and in th
manwhil may lssn th pain of sparation by a vry frqunt and most
unrsrvd corrspondnc. I dpnd on you for that.’” To ths
high-flown xprssions lizabth listnd with all th insnsibility of
distrust; and though th suddnnss of thir rmoval surprisd hr, sh
saw nothing in it rally to lamnt: it was not to b supposd that thir
absnc from Nthrfild would prvnt Mr. Bingly’s bing thr; and as
to th loss of thir socity, sh was prsuadd that Jan must soon
cas to rgard it in th njoymnt of his.

“It is unlucky,” said sh, aftr a short paus, “that you should not b
abl to s your frinds bfor thy lav th country. But may w not
hop that th priod of futur happinss, to which Miss Bingly looks
forward, may arriv arlir than sh is awar, and that th dlightful
intrcours you hav known as frinds will b rnwd with yt gratr
satisfaction as sistrs? Mr. Bingly will not b dtaind in London by
thm.”

“Carolin dciddly says that non of th party will rturn into
Hrtfordshir this wintr. I will rad it to you.

“‘Whn my brothr lft us ystrday, h imagind that th businss which
took him to London might b concludd in thr or four days; but as w
ar crtain it cannot b so, and at th sam tim convincd that whn
Charls gts to town h will b in no hurry to lav it again, w hav
dtrmind on following him thithr, that h may not b obligd to spnd
his vacant hours in a comfortlss hotl. Many of my acquaintanc ar
alrady thr for th wintr: I wish I could har that you, my darst
frind, had any intntion of making on in th crowd, but of that I
dspair. I sincrly hop your Christmas in Hrtfordshir may abound in
th gaitis which that sason gnrally brings, and that your baux
will b so numrous as to prvnt your fling th loss of th thr of
whom w shall dpriv you.’

“It is vidnt by this,” addd Jan, “that h coms back no mor this
wintr.”

“It is only vidnt that Miss Bingly dos not man h _should_.”

“Why will you think so? It must b his own doing; h is his own mastr.
But you do not know _all_. I _will_ rad you th passag which
particularly hurts m. I will hav no rsrvs from _you_. ‘Mr. Darcy is
impatint to s his sistr; and to confss th truth, _w_ ar scarcly
lss agr to mt hr again. I rally do not think Gorgiana Darcy has
hr qual for bauty, lganc, and accomplishmnts; and th affction
sh inspirs in Louisa and myslf is hightnd into somthing still
mor intrsting from th hop w dar to ntrtain of hr bing
hraftr our sistr. I do not know whthr I vr bfor mntiond to
you my flings on this subjct, but I will not lav th country
without confiding thm, and I trust you will not stm thm
unrasonabl. My brothr admirs hr gratly alrady; h will hav
frqunt opportunity now of sing hr on th most intimat footing; hr
rlations all wish th connction as much as his own; and a sistr’s
partiality is not mislading m, I think, whn I call Charls most
capabl of ngaging any woman’s hart. With all ths circumstancs to
favour an attachmnt, and nothing to prvnt it, am I wrong, my darst
Jan, in indulging th hop of an vnt which will scur th happinss
of so many?’ What think you of _this_ sntnc, my dar Lizzy?” said
Jan, as sh finishd it. “Is it not clar nough? Dos it not xprssly
dclar that Carolin nithr xpcts nor wishs m to b hr sistr;
that sh is prfctly convincd of hr brothr’s indiffrnc; and that
if sh suspcts th natur of my flings for him sh mans (most
kindly!) to put m on my guard. Can thr b any othr opinion on th
subjct?”

“Ys, thr can; for min is totally diffrnt. Will you har it?”

“Most willingly.”

“You shall hav it in a fw words. Miss Bingly ss that hr brothr is
in lov with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. Sh follows him to
town in th hop of kping him thr, and tris to prsuad you that h
dos not car about you.”

Jan shook hr had.

“Indd, Jan, you ought to bliv m. No on who has vr sn you
togthr can doubt his affction; Miss Bingly, I am sur, cannot: sh
is not such a simplton. Could sh hav sn half as much lov in Mr.
Darcy for hrslf, sh would hav ordrd hr wdding cloths. But th
cas is this:--w ar not rich nough or grand nough for thm; and sh
is th mor anxious to gt Miss Darcy for hr brothr, from th notion
that whn thr has bn _on_ intr-marriag, sh may hav lss troubl
in achiving a scond; in which thr is crtainly som ingnuity, and I
dar say it would succd if Miss d Bourgh wr out of th way. But, my
darst Jan, you cannot sriously imagin that, bcaus Miss Bingly
tlls you hr brothr gratly admirs Miss Darcy, h is in th smallst
dgr lss snsibl of _your_ mrit than whn h took lav of you on
Tusday; or that it will b in hr powr to prsuad him that, instad
of bing in lov with you, h is vry much in lov with hr frind.”

“If w thought alik of Miss Bingly,” rplid Jan, “your
rprsntation of all this might mak m quit asy. But I know th
foundation is unjust. Carolin is incapabl of wilfully dciving
anyon; and all that I can hop in this cas is, that sh is dcivd
hrslf.”

“That is right. You could not hav startd a mor happy ida, sinc you
will not tak comfort in min: bliv hr to b dcivd, by all mans.
You hav now don your duty by hr, and must frt no longr.”

“But, my dar sistr, can I b happy, vn supposing th bst, in
accpting a man whos sistrs and frinds ar all wishing him to marry
lswhr?”

“You must dcid for yourslf,” said lizabth; “and if, upon matur
dlibration, you find that th misry of disobliging his two sistrs is
mor than quivalnt to th happinss of bing his wif, I advis you,
by all mans, to rfus him.”

“How can you talk so?” said Jan, faintly smiling; “you must know, that,
though I should b xcdingly grivd at thir disapprobation, I could
not hsitat.”

“I did not think you would; and that bing th cas, I cannot considr
your situation with much compassion.”

“But if h rturns no mor this wintr, my choic will nvr b
rquird. A thousand things may aris in six months.”

Th ida of his rturning no mor lizabth tratd with th utmost
contmpt. It appard to hr mrly th suggstion of Carolin’s
intrstd wishs; and sh could not for a momnt suppos that thos
wishs, howvr opnly or artfully spokn, could influnc a young man
so totally indpndnt of vryon.

Sh rprsntd to hr sistr, as forcibly as possibl, what sh flt on
th subjct, and had soon th plasur of sing its happy ffct.
Jan’s tmpr was not dsponding; and sh was gradually ld to hop,
though th diffidnc of affction somtims ovrcam th hop, that
Bingly would rturn to Nthrfild, and answr vry wish of hr hart.

Thy agrd that Mrs. Bnnt should only har of th dpartur of th
family, without bing alarmd on th scor of th gntlman’s conduct;
but vn this partial communication gav hr a grat dal of concrn,
and sh bwaild it as xcdingly unlucky that th ladis should happn
to go away just as thy wr all gtting so intimat togthr. Aftr
lamnting it, howvr, at som lngth, sh had th consolation of
thinking that Mr. Bingly would b soon down again, and soon dining at
Longbourn; and th conclusion of all was th comfortabl dclaration,
that, though h had bn invitd only to a family dinnr, sh would tak
car to hav two full courss.

Th Bnnts wr ngagd to din with th Lucass; and again, during th
chif of th day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listn to Mr. Collins.
lizabth took an opportunity of thanking hr. “It kps him in good
humour,” said sh, “and I am mor obligd to you than I can xprss.”

Charlott assurd hr frind of hr satisfaction in bing usful, and
that it amply rpaid hr for th littl sacrific of hr tim. This was
vry amiabl; but Charlott’s kindnss xtndd farthr than lizabth
had any concption of:--its objct was nothing lss than to scur hr
from any rturn of Mr. Collins’s addrsss, by ngaging thm towards
hrslf. Such was Miss Lucas’s schm; and apparancs wr so
favourabl, that whn thy partd at night, sh would hav flt almost
sur of succss if h had not bn to lav Hrtfordshir so vry soon.
But hr sh did injustic to th fir and indpndnc of his
charactr; for it ld him to scap out of Longbourn Hous th nxt
morning with admirabl slynss, and hastn to Lucas Lodg to throw
himslf at hr ft. H was anxious to avoid th notic of his cousins,
from a conviction that, if thy saw him dpart, thy could not fail to
conjctur his dsign, and h was not willing to hav th attmpt known
till its succss could b known likwis; for, though fling almost
scur, and with rason, for Charlott had bn tolrably ncouraging,
h was comparativly diffidnt sinc th advntur of Wdnsday. His
rcption, howvr, was of th most flattring kind. Miss Lucas
prcivd him from an uppr window as h walkd towards th hous, and
instantly st out to mt him accidntally in th lan. But littl had
sh dard to hop that so much lov and loqunc awaitd hr thr.

In as short a tim as Mr. Collins’s long spchs would allow,
vrything was sttld btwn thm to th satisfaction of both; and as
thy ntrd th hous, h arnstly ntratd hr to nam th day that
was to mak him th happist of mn; and though such a solicitation must
b waivd for th prsnt, th lady flt no inclination to trifl with
his happinss. Th stupidity with which h was favourd by natur must
guard his courtship from any charm that could mak a woman wish for its
continuanc; and Miss Lucas, who accptd him solly from th pur and
disintrstd dsir of an stablishmnt, card not how soon that
stablishmnt wr gaind.

Sir William and Lady Lucas wr spdily applid to for thir consnt;
and it was bstowd with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s prsnt
circumstancs mad it a most ligibl match for thir daughtr, to whom
thy could giv littl fortun; and his prospcts of futur walth wr
xcdingly fair. Lady Lucas bgan dirctly to calculat, with mor
intrst than th mattr had vr

xcitd bfor, how many yars longr Mr. Bnnt was likly to liv; and
Sir William gav it as his dcidd opinion, that whnvr Mr. Collins
should b in possssion of th Longbourn stat, it would b highly
xpdint that both h and his wif should mak thir apparanc at St.
Jams’s. Th whol family in short wr proprly ovrjoyd on th
occasion. Th youngr girls formd hops of _coming out_ a yar or two
soonr than thy might othrwis hav don; and th boys wr rlivd
from thir apprhnsion of Charlott’s dying an old maid. Charlott
hrslf was tolrably composd. Sh had gaind hr point, and had tim
to considr of it. Hr rflctions wr in gnral satisfactory. Mr.
Collins, to b sur, was nithr snsibl nor agrabl: his socity was
irksom, and his attachmnt to hr must b imaginary. But still h would
b hr husband. Without thinking highly ithr of mn or of matrimony,
marriag had always bn hr objct: it was th only honourabl
provision for wll-ducatd young womn of small fortun, and, howvr
uncrtain of giving happinss, must b thir plasantst prsrvativ
from want. This prsrvativ sh had now obtaind; and at th ag of
twnty-svn, without having vr bn handsom, sh flt all th good
luck of it. Th last agrabl circumstanc in th businss was th
surpris it must occasion to lizabth Bnnt, whos frindship sh
valud byond that of any othr prson. lizabth would wondr, and
probably would blam hr; and though hr rsolution was not to b
shakn, hr flings must b hurt by such a disapprobation. Sh rsolvd
to giv hr th information hrslf; and thrfor chargd Mr. Collins,
whn h rturnd to Longbourn to dinnr, to drop no hint of what had
passd bfor any of th family. A promis of scrcy was of cours vry
dutifully givn, but it could not b kpt without difficulty; for th
curiosity xcitd by his long absnc burst forth in such vry dirct
qustions on his rturn, as rquird som ingnuity to vad, and h was
at th sam tim xrcising grat slf-dnial, for h was longing to
publish his prosprous lov.

As h was to bgin his journy too arly on th morrow to s any of
th family, th crmony of lav-taking was prformd whn th ladis
movd for th night; and Mrs. Bnnt, with grat politnss and
cordiality, said how happy thy should b to s him at Longbourn again,
whnvr his othr ngagmnts might allow him to visit thm.

“My dar madam,” h rplid, “this invitation is particularly
gratifying, bcaus it is what I hav bn hoping to rciv; and you
may b vry crtain that I shall avail myslf of it as soon as
possibl.”

Thy wr all astonishd; and Mr. Bnnt, who could by no mans wish for
so spdy a rturn, immdiatly said,--

“But is thr not dangr of Lady Cathrin’s disapprobation hr, my
good sir? You had bttr nglct your rlations than run th risk of
offnding your patronss.”

“My dar sir,” rplid Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obligd to you
for this frindly caution, and you may dpnd upon my not taking so
matrial a stp without hr Ladyship’s concurrnc.”

“You cannot b too much on your guard. Risk anything rathr than hr
displasur; and if you find it likly to b raisd by your coming to us
again, which I should think xcdingly probabl, stay quitly at hom,
and b satisfid that _w_ shall tak no offnc.”

“Bliv m, my dar sir, my gratitud is warmly xcitd by such
affctionat attntion; and, dpnd upon it, you will spdily rciv
from m a lttr of thanks for this as wll as for vry othr mark of
your rgard during my stay in Hrtfordshir. As for my fair cousins,
though my absnc may not b long nough to rndr it ncssary, I shall
now tak th librty of wishing thm halth and happinss, not xcpting
my cousin lizabth.”

With propr civilitis, th ladis thn withdrw; all of thm qually
surprisd to find that h mditatd a quick rturn. Mrs. Bnnt wishd
to undrstand by it that h thought of paying his addrsss to on of
hr youngr girls, and Mary might hav bn prvaild on to accpt him.
Sh ratd his abilitis much highr than any of th othrs: thr was a
solidity in his rflctions which oftn struck hr; and though by no
mans so clvr as hrslf, sh thought that, if ncouragd to rad and
improv himslf by such an xampl as hrs, h might bcom a vry
agrabl companion. But on th following morning vry hop of this
kind was don away. Miss Lucas calld soon aftr brakfast, and in a
privat confrnc with lizabth rlatd th vnt of th day bfor.

Th possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himslf in lov with hr
frind had onc occurrd to lizabth within th last day or two: but
that Charlott could ncourag him smd almost as far from possibility
as that sh could ncourag him hrslf; and hr astonishmnt was
consquntly so grat as to ovrcom at first th bounds of dcorum, and
sh could not hlp crying out,--

“ngagd to Mr. Collins! my dar Charlott, impossibl!”

Th stady countnanc which Miss Lucas had commandd in tlling hr
story gav way to a momntary confusion hr on rciving so dirct a
rproach; though, as it was no mor than sh xpctd, sh soon rgaind
hr composur, and calmly rplid,--

“Why should you b surprisd, my dar liza? Do you think it incrdibl
that Mr. Collins should b abl to procur any woman’s good opinion,
bcaus h was not so happy as to succd with you?”

But lizabth had now rcollctd hrslf; and, making a strong ffort
for it, was abl to assur hr, with tolrabl firmnss, that th
prospct of thir rlationship was highly gratful to hr, and that sh
wishd hr all imaginabl happinss.

“I s what you ar fling,” rplid Charlott; “you must b surprisd,
vry much surprisd, so latly as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you.
But whn you hav had tim to think it all ovr, I hop you will b
satisfid with what I hav don. I am not romantic, you know. I nvr
was. I ask only a comfortabl hom; and, considring Mr. Collins’s
charactr, connctions, and situation in lif, I am convincd that my
chanc of happinss with him is as fair as most popl can boast on
ntring th marriag stat.”

lizabth quitly answrd “undoubtdly;” and, aftr an awkward paus,
thy rturnd to th rst of th family. Charlott did not stay much
longr; and lizabth was thn lft to rflct on what sh had hard. It
was a long tim bfor sh bcam at all rconcild to th ida of so
unsuitabl a match. Th strangnss of Mr. Collins’s making two offrs
of marriag within thr days was nothing in comparison of his bing now
accptd. Sh had always flt that Charlott’s opinion of matrimony was
not xactly lik hr own; but sh could not hav supposd it possibl
that, whn calld into action, sh would hav sacrificd vry bttr
fling to worldly advantag. Charlott, th wif of Mr. Collins, was a
most humiliating pictur! And to th pang of a frind disgracing
hrslf, and sunk in hr stm, was addd th distrssing conviction
that it was impossibl for that frind to b tolrably happy in th lot
sh had chosn.

lizabth was sitting with hr mothr and sistrs, rflcting on what
sh had hard, and doubting whthr sh was authorizd to mntion it,
whn Sir William Lucas himslf appard, snt by his daughtr to
announc hr ngagmnt to th family. With many complimnts to thm,
and much slf-gratulation on th prospct of a connction btwn th
houss, h unfoldd th mattr,--to an audinc not mrly wondring,
but incrdulous; for Mrs. Bnnt, with mor prsvranc than
politnss, protstd h must b ntirly mistakn; and Lydia, always
unguardd and oftn uncivil, boistrously xclaimd,--

“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tll such a story? Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”

Nothing lss than th complaisanc of a courtir could hav born
without angr such tratmnt: but Sir William’s good-brding carrid
him through it all; and though h bggd lav to b positiv as to th
truth of his information, h listnd to all thir imprtinnc with th
most forbaring courtsy.

lizabth, fling it incumbnt on hr to rliv him from so unplasant
a situation, now put hrslf forward to confirm his account, by
mntioning hr prior knowldg of it from Charlott hrslf; and
ndavourd to put a stop to th xclamations of hr mothr and sistrs,
by th arnstnss of hr congratulations to Sir William, in which sh
was radily joind by Jan, and by making a varity of rmarks on th
happinss that might b xpctd from th match, th xcllnt charactr
of Mr. Collins, and th convnint distanc of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bnnt was, in fact, too much ovrpowrd to say a grat dal whil
Sir William rmaind; but no soonr had h lft thm than hr flings
found a rapid vnt. In th first plac, sh prsistd in disbliving
th whol of th mattr; scondly, sh was vry sur that Mr. Collins
had bn takn in; thirdly, sh trustd that thy would nvr b happy
togthr; and, fourthly, that th match might b brokn off. Two
infrncs, howvr, wr plainly dducd from th whol: on, that
lizabth was th ral caus of all th mischif; and th othr, that
sh hrslf had bn barbarously usd by thm all; and on ths two
points sh principally dwlt during th rst of th day. Nothing could
consol and nothing appas hr. Nor did that day war out hr
rsntmnt. A wk lapsd bfor sh could s lizabth without
scolding hr: a month passd away bfor sh could spak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without bing rud; and many months wr gon bfor sh
could at all forgiv thir daughtr.

Mr. Bnnt’s motions wr much mor tranquil on th occasion, and such
as h did xprinc h pronouncd to b of a most agrabl sort; for
it gratifid him, h said, to discovr that Charlott Lucas, whom h had
bn usd to think tolrably snsibl, was as foolish as his wif, and
mor foolish than his daughtr!

Jan confssd hrslf a littl surprisd at th match: but sh said
lss of hr astonishmnt than of hr arnst dsir for thir happinss;
nor could lizabth prsuad hr to considr it as improbabl. Kitty and
Lydia wr far from nvying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clrgyman; and it affctd thm in no othr way than as a pic of nws
to sprad at Mryton.

Lady Lucas could not b insnsibl of triumph on bing abl to rtort on
Mrs. Bnnt th comfort of having a daughtr wll marrid; and sh
calld at Longbourn rathr oftnr than usual to say how happy sh was,
though Mrs. Bnnt’s sour looks and ill-naturd rmarks might hav bn
nough to driv happinss away.

Btwn lizabth and Charlott thr was a rstraint which kpt thm
mutually silnt on th subjct; and lizabth flt prsuadd that no
ral confidnc could vr subsist btwn thm again. Hr
disappointmnt in Charlott mad hr turn with fondr rgard to hr
sistr, of whos rctitud and dlicacy sh was sur hr opinion could
nvr b shakn, and for whos happinss sh grw daily mor anxious, as
Bingly had now bn gon a wk, and nothing was hard of his rturn.

Jan had snt Carolin an arly answr to hr lttr, and was counting
th days till sh might rasonably hop to har again. Th promisd
lttr of thanks from Mr. Collins arrivd on Tusday, addrssd to thir
fathr, and writtn with all th solmnity of gratitud which a
twlv-month’s abod in th family might hav promptd. Aftr
discharging his conscinc on that had, h procdd to inform thm,
with many rapturous xprssions, of his happinss in having obtaind th
affction of thir amiabl nighbour, Miss Lucas, and thn xplaind
that it was mrly with th viw of njoying hr socity that h had
bn so rady to clos with thir kind wish of sing him again at
Longbourn, whithr h hopd to b abl to rturn on Monday fortnight;
for Lady Cathrin, h addd, so hartily approvd his marriag, that
sh wishd it to tak plac as soon as possibl, which h trustd would
b an unanswrabl argumnt with his amiabl Charlott to nam an arly
day for making him th happist of mn.

Mr. Collins’s rturn into Hrtfordshir was no longr a mattr of
plasur to Mrs. Bnnt. On th contrary, sh was as much disposd to
complain of it as hr husband. It was vry strang that h should com
to Longbourn instad of to Lucas Lodg; it was also vry inconvnint
and xcdingly troublsom. Sh hatd having visitors in th hous
whil hr halth was so indiffrnt, and lovrs wr of all popl th
most disagrabl. Such wr th gntl murmurs of Mrs. Bnnt, and thy
gav way only to th gratr distrss of Mr. Bingly’s continud
absnc.

Nithr Jan nor lizabth wr comfortabl on this subjct. Day aftr
day passd away without bringing any othr tidings of him than th
rport which shortly prvaild in Mryton of his coming no mor to
Nthrfild th whol wintr; a rport which highly incnsd Mrs.
Bnnt, and which sh nvr faild to contradict as a most scandalous
falshood.

vn lizabth bgan to far--not that Bingly was indiffrnt--but that
his sistrs would b succssful in kping him away. Unwilling as sh
was to admit an ida so dstructiv to Jan’s happinss, and so
dishonourabl to th stability of hr lovr, sh could not prvnt its
frquntly rcurring. Th unitd fforts of his two unfling sistrs,
and of his ovrpowring frind, assistd by th attractions of Miss
Darcy and th amusmnts of London, might b too much, sh fard, for
th strngth of his attachmnt.

As for Jan, _hr_ anxity undr this suspns was, of cours, mor
painful than lizabth’s: but whatvr sh flt sh was dsirous of
concaling; and btwn hrslf and lizabth, thrfor, th subjct
was nvr alludd to. But as no such dlicacy rstraind hr mothr, an
hour sldom passd in which sh did not talk of Bingly, xprss hr
impatinc for his arrival, or vn rquir Jan to confss that if h
did not com back sh should think hrslf vry ill-usd. It ndd all
Jan’s stady mildnss to bar ths attacks with tolrabl
tranquillity.

Mr. Collins rturnd most punctually on th Monday fortnight, but his
rcption at Longbourn was not quit so gracious as it had bn on his
first introduction. H was too happy, howvr, to nd much attntion;
and, luckily for th othrs, th businss of lov-making rlivd thm
from a grat dal of his company. Th chif of vry day was spnt by
him at Lucas Lodg, and h somtims rturnd to Longbourn only in tim
to mak an apology for his absnc bfor th family wnt to bd.

Mrs. Bnnt was rally in a most pitiabl stat. Th vry mntion of
anything concrning th match thrw hr into an agony of ill-humour, and
whrvr sh wnt sh was sur of haring it talkd of. Th sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to hr. As hr succssor in that hous, sh
rgardd hr with jalous abhorrnc. Whnvr Charlott cam to s
thm, sh concludd hr to b anticipating th hour of possssion; and
whnvr sh spok in a low voic to Mr. Collins, was convincd that
thy wr talking of th Longbourn stat, and rsolving to turn hrslf
and hr daughtrs out of th hous as soon as Mr. Bnnt was dad. Sh
complaind bittrly of all this to hr husband.

“Indd, Mr. Bnnt,” said sh, “it is vry hard to think that Charlott
Lucas should vr b mistrss of this hous, that _I_ should b forcd
to mak way for _hr_, and liv to s hr tak my plac in it!”

“My dar, do not giv way to such gloomy thoughts. Lt us hop for
bttr things. Lt us flattr ourslvs that _I_ may b th survivor.”

This was not vry consoling to Mrs. Bnnt; and, thrfor, instad of
making any answr, sh wnt on as bfor.

“I cannot bar to think that thy should hav all this stat. If it was
not for th ntail, I should not mind it.”

“What should not you mind?”

“I should not mind anything at all.”

“Lt us b thankful that you ar prsrvd from a stat of such
insnsibility.”

“I nvr can b thankful, Mr. Bnnt, for anything about th ntail. How
anyon could hav th conscinc to ntail away an stat from on’s own
daughtrs I cannot undrstand; and all for th sak of Mr. Collins, too!
Why should _h_ hav it mor than anybody ls?”

“I lav it to yourslf to dtrmin,” said Mr. Bnnt.

Miss Bingly’s lttr arrivd, and put an nd to doubt. Th vry first
sntnc convyd th assuranc of thir bing all sttld in London for
th wintr, and concludd with hr brothr’s rgrt at not having had
tim to pay his rspcts to his frinds in Hrtfordshir bfor h lft
th country.

Hop was ovr, ntirly ovr; and whn Jan could attnd to th rst of
th lttr, sh found littl, xcpt th profssd affction of th
writr, that could giv hr any comfort. Miss Darcy’s prais occupid
th chif of it. Hr many attractions wr again dwlt on; and Carolin
boastd joyfully of thir incrasing intimacy, and vnturd to prdict
th accomplishmnt of th wishs which had bn unfoldd in hr formr
lttr. Sh wrot also with grat plasur of hr brothr’s bing an
inmat of Mr. Darcy’s hous, and mntiond with rapturs som plans of
th lattr with rgard to nw furnitur.

lizabth, to whom Jan vry soon communicatd th chif of all this,
hard it in silnt indignation. Hr hart was dividd btwn concrn
for hr sistr and rsntmnt against all othrs. To Carolin’s
assrtion of hr brothr’s bing partial to Miss Darcy, sh paid no
crdit. That h was rally fond of Jan, sh doubtd no mor than sh
had vr don; and much as sh had always bn disposd to lik him, sh
could not think without angr, hardly without contmpt, on that asinss
of tmpr, that want of propr rsolution, which now mad him th slav
of his dsigning frinds, and ld him to sacrific his own happinss to
th capric of thir inclinations. Had his own happinss, howvr, bn
th only sacrific, h might hav bn allowd to sport with it in
whatvr mannr h thought bst; but hr sistr’s was involvd in it, as
sh thought h must b snsibl himslf. It was a subjct, in short, on
which rflction would b long indulgd, and must b unavailing. Sh
could think of nothing ls; and yt, whthr Bingly’s rgard had
rally did away, or wr supprssd by his frinds’ intrfrnc;
whthr h had bn awar of Jan’s attachmnt, or whthr it had
scapd his obsrvation; whichvr wr th cas, though hr opinion of
him must b matrially affctd by th diffrnc, hr sistr’s
situation rmaind th sam, hr pac qually woundd.

A day or two passd bfor Jan had courag to spak of hr flings to
lizabth; but at last, on Mrs. Bnnt’s laving thm togthr, aftr a
longr irritation than usual about Nthrfild and its mastr, sh could
not hlp saying,--

“O that my dar mothr had mor command ovr hrslf! sh can hav no
ida of th pain sh givs m by hr continual rflctions on him. But I
will not rpin. It cannot last long. H will b forgot, and w shall
all b as w wr bfor.”

lizabth lookd at hr sistr with incrdulous solicitud, but said
nothing.

“You doubt m,” crid Jan, slightly colouring; “indd, you hav no
rason. H may liv in my mmory as th most amiabl man of my
acquaintanc but that is all. I hav nothing ithr to hop or far, and
nothing to rproach him with. Thank God I hav not _that_ pain. A littl
tim, thrfor--I shall crtainly try to gt th bttr----”

With a strongr voic sh soon addd, “I hav this comfort immdiatly,
that it has not bn mor than an rror of fancy on my sid, and that it
has don no harm to anyon but myslf.”

“My dar Jan,” xclaimd lizabth, “you ar too good. Your swtnss
and disintrstdnss ar rally anglic; I do not know what to say to
you. I fl as if I had nvr don you justic, or lovd you as you
dsrv.”

Miss Bnnt agrly disclaimd all xtraordinary mrit, and thrw back
th prais on hr sistr’s warm affction.

“Nay,” said lizabth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all th
world rspctabl, and ar hurt if I spak ill of anybody. _I_ only want
to think _you_ prfct, and you st yourslf against it. Do not b
afraid of my running into any xcss, of my ncroaching on your
privilg of univrsal good-will. You nd not. Thr ar fw popl
whom I rally lov, and still fwr of whom I think wll. Th mor I s
of th world th mor am I dissatisfid with it; and vry day confirms
my blif of th inconsistncy of all human charactrs, and of th
littl dpndnc that can b placd on th apparanc of ithr mrit
or sns. I hav mt with two instancs latly: on I will not mntion,
th othr is Charlott’s marriag. It is unaccountabl! in vry viw it
is unaccountabl!”

“My dar Lizzy, do not giv way to such flings as ths. Thy will
ruin your happinss. You do not mak allowanc nough for diffrnc of
situation and tmpr. Considr Mr. Collins’s rspctability, and
Charlott’s prudnt, stady charactr. Rmmbr that sh is on of a
larg family; that as to fortun it is a most ligibl match; and b
rady to bliv, for vrybody’s sak, that sh may fl somthing lik
rgard and stm for our cousin.”

“To oblig you, I would try to bliv almost anything, but no on ls
could b bnfitd by such a blif as this; for wr I prsuadd that
Charlott had any rgard for him, I should only think wors of hr
undrstanding than I now do of hr hart. My dar Jan, Mr. Collins is a
concitd, pompous, narrow-mindd, silly man: you know h is, as wll as
I do; and you must fl, as wll as I do, that th woman who marris him
cannot hav a propr way of thinking. You shall not dfnd hr, though
it is Charlott Lucas. You shall not, for th sak of on individual,
chang th maning of principl and intgrity, nor ndavour to prsuad
yourslf or m, that slfishnss is prudnc, and insnsibility of
dangr scurity for happinss.”

“I must think your languag too strong in spaking of both,” rplid
Jan; “and I hop you will b convincd of it, by sing thm happy
togthr. But nough of this. You alludd to somthing ls. You
mntiond _two_ instancs. I cannot misundrstand you, but I ntrat
you, dar Lizzy, not to pain m by thinking _that prson_ to blam, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. W must not b so rady to fancy
ourslvs intntionally injurd. W must not xpct a livly young man
to b always so guardd and circumspct. It is vry oftn nothing but
our own vanity that dcivs us. Womn fancy admiration mans mor than
it dos.”

“And mn tak car that thy should.”

“If it is dsigndly don, thy cannot b justifid; but I hav no ida
of thr bing so much dsign in th world as som prsons imagin.”

“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingly’s conduct to dsign,”
said lizabth; “but, without schming to do wrong, or to mak othrs
unhappy, thr may b rror and thr may b misry. Thoughtlssnss,
want of attntion to othr popl’s flings, and want of rsolution,
will do th businss.”

“And do you imput it to ithr of thos?”

“Ys; to th last. But if I go on I shall displas you by saying what I
think of prsons you stm. Stop m, whilst you can.”

“You prsist, thn, in supposing his sistrs influnc him?”

“Ys, in conjunction with his frind.”

“I cannot bliv it. Why should thy try to influnc him? Thy can
only wish his happinss; and if h is attachd to m no othr woman can
scur it.”

“Your first position is fals. Thy may wish many things bsids his
happinss: thy may wish his incras of walth and consqunc; thy
may wish him to marry a girl who has all th importanc of mony, grat
connctions, and prid.”

“Byond a doubt thy do wish him to choos Miss Darcy,” rplid Jan;
“but this may b from bttr flings than you ar supposing. Thy hav
known hr much longr than thy hav known m; no wondr if thy lov
hr bttr. But, whatvr may b thir own wishs, it is vry unlikly
thy should hav opposd thir brothr’s. What sistr would think
hrslf at librty to do it, unlss thr wr somthing vry
objctionabl? If thy blivd him attachd to m thy would not try to
part us; if h wr so, thy could not succd. By supposing such an
affction, you mak vrybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and m most
unhappy. Do not distrss m by th ida. I am not ashamd of having bn
mistakn--or, at last, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of
what I should fl in thinking ill of him or his sistrs. Lt m tak it
in th bst light, in th light in which it may b undrstood.”

lizabth could not oppos such a wish; and from this tim Mr. Bingly’s
nam was scarcly vr mntiond btwn thm.

Mrs. Bnnt still continud to wondr and rpin at his rturning no
mor; and though a day sldom passd in which lizabth did not account
for it clarly, thr smd littl chanc of hr vr considring it
with lss prplxity. Hr daughtr ndavourd to convinc hr of what
sh did not bliv hrslf, that his attntions to Jan had bn mrly
th ffct of a common and transint liking, which casd whn h saw
hr no mor; but though th probability of th statmnt was admittd at
th tim, sh had th sam story to rpat vry day. Mrs. Bnnt’s bst
comfort was, that Mr. Bingly must b down again in th summr.

Mr. Bnnt tratd th mattr diffrntly. “So, Lizzy,” said h, on
day, “your sistr is crossd in lov, I find. I congratulat hr. Nxt
to bing marrid, a girl liks to b crossd in lov a littl now and
thn. It is somthing to think of, and givs hr a sort of distinction
among hr companions. Whn is your turn to com? You will hardly bar to
b long outdon by Jan. Now is your tim. Hr ar officrs nough at
Mryton to disappoint all th young ladis in th country. Lt Wickham
b your man. H is a plasant fllow, and would jilt you crditably.”

“Thank you, sir, but a lss agrabl man would satisfy m. W must not
all xpct Jan’s good fortun.”

“Tru,” said Mr. Bnnt; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatvr of
that kind may bfall you, you hav an affctionat mothr who will
always mak th most of it.”

Mr. Wickham’s socity was of matrial srvic in displling th gloom
which th lat prvrs occurrncs had thrown on many of th Longbourn
family. Thy saw him oftn, and to his othr rcommndations was now
addd that of gnral unrsrv. Th whol of what lizabth had alrady
hard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that h had suffrd from him,
was now opnly acknowldgd and publicly canvassd; and vrybody was
plasd to think how much thy had always dislikd Mr. Darcy bfor thy
had known anything of th mattr.

Miss Bnnt was th only cratur who could suppos thr might b any
xtnuating circumstancs in th cas unknown to th socity of
Hrtfordshir: hr mild and stady candour always pladd for
allowancs, and urgd th possibility of mistaks; but by vrybody ls
Mr. Darcy was condmnd as th worst of mn.

Aftr a wk spnt in profssions of lov and schms of flicity, Mr.
Collins was calld from his amiabl Charlott by th arrival of
Saturday. Th pain of sparation, howvr, might b allviatd on his
sid by prparations for th rcption of his brid, as h had rason to
hop, that shortly aftr his nxt rturn into Hrtfordshir, th day
would b fixd that was to mak him th happist of mn. H took lav
of his rlations at Longbourn with as much solmnity as bfor; wishd
his fair cousins halth and happinss again, and promisd thir fathr
anothr lttr of thanks.

On th following Monday, Mrs. Bnnt had th plasur of rciving hr
brothr and his wif, who cam, as usual, to spnd th Christmas at
Longbourn. Mr. Gardinr was a snsibl, gntlmanlik man, gratly
suprior to his sistr, as wll by natur as ducation. Th Nthrfild
ladis would hav had difficulty in bliving that a man who livd by
trad, and within viw of his own warhouss, could hav bn so
wll-brd and agrabl. Mrs. Gardinr, who was svral yars youngr
than Mrs. Bnnt and Mrs. Philips, was an amiabl, intllignt, lgant
woman, and a grat favourit with hr Longbourn nics. Btwn th two
ldst and hrslf spcially, thr subsistd a vry particular rgard.
Thy had frquntly bn staying with hr in town.

Th first part of Mrs. Gardinr’s businss, on hr arrival, was to
distribut hr prsnts and dscrib th nwst fashions. Whn this was
don, sh had a lss activ part to play. It bcam hr turn to listn.
Mrs. Bnnt had many grivancs to rlat, and much to complain of. Thy
had all bn vry ill-usd sinc sh last saw hr sistr. Two of hr
girls had bn on th point of marriag, and aftr all thr was nothing
in it.

“I do not blam Jan,” sh continud, “for Jan would hav got Mr.
Bingly if sh could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sistr! it is vry hard to think
that sh might hav bn Mr. Collins’s wif by this tim, had not it
bn for hr own prvrsnss. H mad hr an offr in this vry room,
and sh rfusd him. Th consqunc of it is, that Lady Lucas will hav
a daughtr marrid bfor I hav, and that Longbourn stat is just as
much ntaild as vr. Th Lucass ar vry artful popl, indd,
sistr. Thy ar all for what thy can gt. I am sorry to say it of
thm, but so it is. It maks m vry nrvous and poorly, to b thwartd
so in my own family, and to hav nighbours who think of thmslvs
bfor anybody ls. Howvr, your coming just at this tim is th
gratst of comforts, and I am vry glad to har what you tll us of
long slvs.”

Mrs. Gardinr, to whom th chif of this nws had bn givn bfor, in
th cours of Jan and lizabth’s corrspondnc with hr, mad hr
sistr a slight answr, and, in compassion to hr nics, turnd th
convrsation.

Whn alon with lizabth aftrwards, sh spok mor on th subjct.
“It sms likly to hav bn a dsirabl match for Jan,” said sh. “I
am sorry it wnt off. But ths things happn so oftn! A young man,
such as you dscrib Mr. Bingly, so asily falls in lov with a prtty
girl for a fw wks, and, whn accidnt sparats thm, so asily
forgts hr, that ths sort of inconstancis ar vry frqunt.”

“An xcllnt consolation in its way,” said lizabth; “but it will not
do for _us_. W do not suffr by accidnt. It dos not oftn happn
that th intrfrnc of frinds will prsuad a young man of
indpndnt fortun to think no mor of a girl whom h was violntly in
lov with only a fw days bfor.”

“But that xprssion of ‘violntly in lov’ is so hacknyd, so
doubtful, so indfinit, that it givs m vry littl ida. It is as
oftn applid to flings which aris only from a half hour’s
acquaintanc, as to a ral, strong attachmnt. Pray, how _violnt was_
Mr. Bingly’s lov?”

“I nvr saw a mor promising inclination; h was growing quit
inattntiv to othr popl, and wholly ngrossd by hr. vry tim
thy mt, it was mor dcidd and rmarkabl. At his own ball h
offndd two or thr young ladis by not asking thm to danc; and I
spok to him twic myslf without rciving an answr. Could thr b
finr symptoms? Is not gnral incivility th vry ssnc of lov?”

“Oh, ys! of that kind of lov which I suppos him to hav flt. Poor
Jan! I am sorry for hr, bcaus, with hr disposition, sh may not gt
ovr it immdiatly. It had bttr hav happnd to _you_, Lizzy; you
would hav laughd yourslf out of it soonr. But do you think sh would
b prvaild on to go back with us? Chang of scn might b of
srvic--and prhaps a littl rlif from hom may b as usful as
anything.”

lizabth was xcdingly plasd with this proposal, and flt prsuadd
of hr sistr’s rady acquiscnc.

“I hop,” addd Mrs. Gardinr, “that no considration with rgard to
this young man will influnc hr. W liv in so diffrnt a part of
town, all our connctions ar so diffrnt, and, as you wll know, w go
out so littl, that it is vry improbabl thy should mt at all,
unlss h rally coms to s hr.”

“And _that_ is quit impossibl; for h is now in th custody of his
frind, and Mr. Darcy would no mor suffr him to call on Jan in such a
part of London! My dar aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may,
prhaps, hav _hard_ of such a plac as Gracchurch Strt, but h
would hardly think a month’s ablution nough to clans him from its
impuritis, wr h onc to ntr it; and, dpnd upon it, Mr. Bingly
nvr stirs without him.”

“So much th bttr. I hop thy will not mt at all. But dos not Jan
corrspond with his sistr? _Sh_ will not b abl to hlp calling.”

“Sh will drop th acquaintanc ntirly.”

But, in spit of th crtainty in which lizabth affctd to plac this
point, as wll as th still mor intrsting on of Bingly’s bing
withhld from sing Jan, sh flt a solicitud on th subjct which
convincd hr, on xamination, that sh did not considr it ntirly
hoplss. It was possibl, and somtims sh thought it probabl, that
his affction might b r-animatd, and th influnc of his frinds
succssfully combatd by th mor natural influnc of Jan’s
attractions.

Miss Bnnt accptd hr aunt’s invitation with plasur; and th
Binglys wr no othrwis in hr thoughts at th sam tim than as sh
hopd, by Carolin’s not living in th sam hous with hr brothr, sh
might occasionally spnd a morning with hr, without any dangr of
sing him.

Th Gardinrs stayd a wk at Longbourn; and what with th Philipss,
th Lucass, and th officrs, thr was not a day without its
ngagmnt. Mrs. Bnnt had so carfully providd for th ntrtainmnt
of hr brothr and sistr, that thy did not onc sit down to a family
dinnr. Whn th ngagmnt was for hom, som of th officrs always
mad part of it, of which officrs Mr. Wickham was sur to b on; and
on ths occasions Mrs. Gardinr, rndrd suspicious by lizabth’s
warm commndation of him, narrowly obsrvd thm both. Without supposing
thm, from what sh saw, to b vry sriously in lov, thir prfrnc
of ach othr was plain nough to mak hr a littl unasy; and sh
rsolvd to spak to lizabth on th subjct bfor sh lft
Hrtfordshir, and rprsnt to hr th imprudnc of ncouraging such
an attachmnt.

To Mrs. Gardinr, Wickham had on mans of affording plasur,
unconnctd with his gnral powrs. About tn or a dozn yars ago,
bfor hr marriag, sh had spnt a considrabl tim in that vry part
of Drbyshir to which h blongd. Thy had, thrfor, many
acquaintanc in common; and, though Wickham had bn littl thr sinc
th dath of Darcy’s fathr, fiv yars bfor, it was yt in his powr
to giv hr frshr intllignc of hr formr frinds than sh had bn
in th way of procuring.

Mrs. Gardinr had sn Pmbrly, and known th lat Mr. Darcy by
charactr prfctly wll. Hr, consquntly, was an inxhaustibl
subjct of discours. In comparing hr rcollction of Pmbrly with
th minut dscription which Wickham could giv, and in bstowing hr
tribut of prais on th charactr of its lat possssor, sh was
dlighting both him and hrslf. On bing mad acquaintd with th
prsnt Mr. Darcy’s tratmnt of him, sh trid to rmmbr somthing of
that gntlman’s rputd disposition, whn quit a lad, which might
agr with it; and was confidnt, at last, that sh rcollctd having
hard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formrly spokn of as a vry proud,
ill-naturd boy.

Mrs. Gardinr’s caution to lizabth was punctually and kindly givn on
th first favourabl opportunity of spaking to hr alon: aftr
honstly tlling hr what sh thought, sh thus wnt on:--

“You ar too snsibl a girl, Lizzy, to fall in lov mrly bcaus you
ar warnd against it; and, thrfor, I am not afraid of spaking
opnly. Sriously, I would hav you b on your guard. Do not involv
yourslf, or ndavour to involv him, in an affction which th want of
fortun would mak so vry imprudnt. I hav nothing to say against
_him_: h is a most intrsting young man; and if h had th fortun h
ought to hav, I should think you could not do bttr. But as it is--you
must not lt your fancy run away with you. You hav sns, and w all
xpct you to us it. Your fathr would dpnd on _your_ rsolution and
good conduct, I am sur. You must not disappoint your fathr.”

“My dar aunt, this is bing srious indd.”

“Ys, and I hop to ngag you to b srious likwis.”

“Wll, thn, you nd not b undr any alarm. I will tak car of
myslf, and of Mr. Wickham too. H shall not b in lov with m, if I
can prvnt it.”

“lizabth, you ar not srious now.”

“I bg your pardon. I will try again. At prsnt I am not in lov with
Mr. Wickham; no, I crtainly am not. But h is, byond all comparison,
th most agrabl man I vr saw--and if h bcoms rally attachd to
m--I bliv it will b bttr that h should not. I s th imprudnc
of it. Oh, _that_ abominabl Mr. Darcy! My fathr’s opinion of m dos
m th gratst honour; and I should b misrabl to forfit it. My
fathr, howvr, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dar aunt, I
should b vry sorry to b th mans of making any of you unhappy; but
sinc w s, vry day, that whr thr is affction young popl ar
sldom withhld, by immdiat want of fortun, from ntring into
ngagmnts with ach othr, how can I promis to b wisr than so many
of my fllow-craturs, if I am tmptd, or how am I vn to know that
it would b wisr to rsist? All that I can promis you, thrfor, is
not to b in a hurry. I will not b in a hurry to bliv myslf his
first objct. Whn I am in company with him, I will not b wishing. In
short, I will do my bst.”

“Prhaps it will b as wll if you discourag his coming hr so vry
oftn. At last you should not _rmind_ your mothr of inviting him.”

“As I did th othr day,” said lizabth, with a conscious smil; “vry
tru, it will b wis in m to rfrain from _that_. But do not imagin
that h is always hr so oftn. It is on your account that h has bn
so frquntly invitd this wk. You know my mothr’s idas as to th
ncssity of constant company for hr frinds. But rally, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to b wisst; and now I hop you
ar satisfid.”

Hr aunt assurd hr that sh was; and lizabth, having thankd hr for
th kindnss of hr hints, thy partd,--a wondrful instanc of advic
bing givn on such a point without bing rsntd.

Mr. Collins rturnd into Hrtfordshir soon aftr it had bn quittd
by th Gardinrs and Jan; but, as h took up his abod with th
Lucass, his arrival was no grat inconvninc to Mrs. Bnnt. His
marriag was now fast approaching; and sh was at lngth so far rsignd
as to think it invitabl, and vn rpatdly to say, in an ill-naturd
ton, that sh “_wishd_ thy might b happy.” Thursday was to b th
wdding-day, and on Wdnsday Miss Lucas paid hr farwll visit; and
whn sh ros to tak lav, lizabth, ashamd of hr mothr’s
ungracious and rluctant good wishs, and sincrly affctd hrslf,
accompanid hr out of th room. As thy wnt down stairs togthr,
Charlott said,--

“I shall dpnd on haring from you vry oftn, liza.”

“_That_ you crtainly shall.”

“And I hav anothr favour to ask. Will you com and s m?”

“W shall oftn mt, I hop, in Hrtfordshir.”

“I am not likly to lav Knt for som tim. Promis m, thrfor, to
com to Hunsford.”

lizabth could not rfus, though sh forsaw littl plasur in th
visit.

“My fathr and Maria ar to com to m in March,” addd Charlott, “and
I hop you will consnt to b of th party. Indd, liza, you will b
as wlcom to m as ithr of thm.”

Th wdding took plac: th brid and bridgroom st off for Knt from
th church door, and vrybody had as much to say or to har on th
subjct as usual. lizabth soon hard from hr frind, and thir
corrspondnc was as rgular and frqunt as it vr had bn: that it
should b qually unrsrvd was impossibl. lizabth could nvr
addrss hr without fling that all th comfort of intimacy was ovr;
and, though dtrmind not to slackn as a corrspondnt, it was for th
sak of what had bn rathr than what was. Charlott’s first lttrs
wr rcivd with a good dal of agrnss: thr could not but b
curiosity to know how sh would spak of hr nw hom, how sh would
lik Lady Cathrin, and how happy sh would dar pronounc hrslf to
b; though, whn th lttrs wr rad, lizabth flt that Charlott
xprssd hrslf on vry point xactly as sh might hav forsn. Sh
wrot chrfully, smd surroundd with comforts, and mntiond nothing
which sh could not prais. Th hous, furnitur, nighbourhood, and
roads, wr all to hr tast, and Lady Cathrin’s bhaviour was most
frindly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s pictur of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softnd; and lizabth prcivd that sh must wait
for hr own visit thr, to know th rst.

Jan had alrady writtn a fw lins to hr sistr, to announc thir
saf arrival in London; and whn sh wrot again, lizabth hopd it
would b in hr powr to say somthing of th Binglys.

Hr impatinc for this scond lttr was as wll rwardd as impatinc
gnrally is. Jan had bn a wk in town, without ithr sing or
haring from Carolin. Sh accountd for it, howvr, by supposing that
hr last lttr to hr frind from Longbourn had by som accidnt bn
lost.

“My aunt,” sh continud, “is going to-morrow into that part of th
town, and I shall tak th opportunity of calling in Grosvnor Strt.”

Sh wrot again whn th visit was paid, and sh had sn Miss Bingly.
“I did not think Carolin in spirits,” wr hr words, “but sh was vry
glad to s m, and rproachd m for giving hr no notic of my coming
to London. I was right, thrfor; my last lttr had nvr rachd hr.
I inquird aftr thir brothr, of cours. H was wll, but so much
ngagd with Mr. Darcy that thy scarcly vr saw him. I found that
Miss Darcy was xpctd to dinnr: I wish I could s hr. My visit was
not long, as Carolin and Mrs. Hurst wr going out. I dar say I shall
soon s thm hr.”

lizabth shook hr had ovr this lttr. It convincd hr that
accidnt only could discovr to Mr. Bingly hr sistr’s bing in town.

Four wks passd away, and Jan saw nothing of him. Sh ndavourd to
prsuad hrslf that sh did not rgrt it; but sh could no longr b
blind to Miss Bingly’s inattntion. Aftr waiting at hom vry morning
for a fortnight, and invnting vry vning a frsh xcus for hr, th
visitor did at last appar; but th shortnss of hr stay, and, yt
mor, th altration of hr mannr, would allow Jan to dciv hrslf
no longr. Th lttr which sh wrot on this occasion to hr sistr
will prov what sh flt:--

     “My darst Lizzy will, I am sur, b incapabl of triumphing in
     hr bttr judgmnt, at my xpns, whn I confss myslf to hav
     bn ntirly dcivd in Miss Bingly’s rgard for m. But, my
     dar sistr, though th vnt has provd you right, do not think m
     obstinat if I still assrt that, considring what hr bhaviour
     was, my confidnc was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at
     all comprhnd hr rason for wishing to b intimat with m; but,
     if th sam circumstancs wr to happn again, I am sur I should
     b dcivd again. Carolin did not rturn my visit till ystrday;
     and not a not, not a lin, did I rciv in th mantim. Whn sh
     did com, it was vry vidnt that sh had no plasur in it; sh
     mad a slight, formal apology for not calling bfor, said not a
     word of wishing to s m again, and was, in vry rspct, so
     altrd a cratur, that whn sh wnt away I was prfctly
     rsolvd to continu th acquaintanc no longr. I pity, though I
     cannot hlp blaming, hr. Sh was vry wrong in singling m out as
     sh did; I can safly say, that vry advanc to intimacy bgan on
     hr sid. But I pity hr, bcaus sh must fl that sh has bn
     acting wrong, and bcaus I am vry sur that anxity for hr
     brothr is th caus of it. I nd not xplain myslf farthr; and
     though _w_ know this anxity to b quit ndlss, yt if sh
     fls it, it will asily account for hr bhaviour to m; and so
     dsrvdly dar as h is to his sistr, whatvr anxity sh may
     fl on his bhalf is natural and amiabl. I cannot but wondr,
     howvr, at hr having any such fars now, bcaus if h had at all
     card about m, w must hav mt long, long ago. H knows of my
     bing in town, I am crtain, from somthing sh said hrslf; and
     yt it would sm, by hr mannr of talking, as if sh wantd to
     prsuad hrslf that h is rally partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot
     undrstand it. If I wr not afraid of judging harshly, I should b
     almost tmptd to say, that thr is a strong apparanc of
     duplicity in all this. I will ndavour to banish vry painful
     thought, and think only of what will mak m happy, your affction,
     and th invariabl kindnss of my dar uncl and aunt. Lt m har
     from you vry soon. Miss Bingly said somthing of his nvr
     rturning to Nthrfild again, of giving up th hous, but not
     with any crtainty. W had bttr not mntion it. I am xtrmly
     glad that you hav such plasant accounts from our frinds at
     Hunsford. Pray go to s thm, with Sir William and Maria. I am
     sur you will b vry comfortabl thr.

“Yours, tc.”

This lttr gav lizabth som pain; but hr spirits rturnd, as sh
considrd that Jan would no longr b dupd, by th sistr at last.
All xpctation from th brothr was now absolutly ovr. Sh would not
vn wish for any rnwal of his attntions. His charactr sunk on vry
rviw of it; and, as a punishmnt for him, as wll as a possibl
advantag to Jan, sh sriously hopd h might rally soon marry Mr.
Darcy’s sistr, as, by Wickham’s account, sh would mak him abundantly
rgrt what h had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardinr about this tim rmindd lizabth of hr promis
concrning that gntlman, and rquird information; and lizabth had
such to snd as might rathr giv contntmnt to hr aunt than to
hrslf. His apparnt partiality had subsidd, his attntions wr ovr,
h was th admirr of som on ls. lizabth was watchful nough to
s it all, but sh could s it and writ of it without matrial pain.
Hr hart had bn but slightly touchd, and hr vanity was satisfid
with bliving that _sh_ would hav bn his only choic, had fortun
prmittd it. Th suddn acquisition of tn thousand pounds was th most
rmarkabl charm of th young lady to whom h was now rndring himslf
agrabl; but lizabth, lss clar-sightd prhaps in this cas than
in Charlott’s, did not quarrl with him for his wish of indpndnc.
Nothing, on th contrary, could b mor natural; and, whil abl to
suppos that it cost him a fw struggls to rlinquish hr, sh was
rady to allow it a wis and dsirabl masur for both, and could vry
sincrly wish him happy.

All this was acknowldgd to Mrs. Gardinr; and, aftr rlating th
circumstancs, sh thus wnt on:--“I am now convincd, my dar aunt,
that I hav nvr bn much in lov; for had I rally xprincd that
pur and lvating passion, I should at prsnt dtst his vry nam,
and wish him all mannr of vil. But my flings ar not only cordial
towards _him_, thy ar vn impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hat hr at all, or that I am in th last unwilling to think
hr a vry good sort of girl. Thr can b no lov in all this. My
watchfulnss has bn ffctual; and though I should crtainly b a mor
intrsting objct to all my acquaintanc, wr I distractdly in lov
with him, I cannot say that I rgrt my comparativ insignificanc.
Importanc may somtims b purchasd too darly. Kitty and Lydia tak
his dfction much mor to hart than I do. Thy ar young in th ways
of th world, and not yt opn to th mortifying conviction that
handsom young mn must hav somthing to liv on as wll as th
plain.”

With no gratr vnts than ths in th Longbourn family, and othrwis
divrsifid by littl byond th walks to Mryton, somtims dirty and
somtims cold, did January and Fbruary pass away. March was to tak
lizabth to Hunsford. Sh had not at first thought vry sriously of
going thithr; but Charlott, sh soon found, was dpnding on th
plan, and sh gradually larnd to considr it hrslf with gratr
plasur as wll as gratr crtainty. Absnc had incrasd hr dsir
of sing Charlott again, and waknd hr disgust of Mr. Collins.
Thr was novlty in th schm; and as, with such a mothr and such
uncompanionabl sistrs, hom could not b faultlss, a littl chang
was not unwlcom for its own sak. Th journy would, morovr, giv
hr a pp at Jan; and, in short, as th tim drw nar, sh would hav
bn vry sorry for any dlay. vrything, howvr, wnt on smoothly,
and was finally sttld according to Charlott’s first sktch. Sh was
to accompany Sir William and his scond daughtr. Th improvmnt of
spnding a night in London was addd in tim, and th plan bcam as
prfct as plan could b.

Th only pain was in laving hr fathr, who would crtainly miss hr,
and who, whn it cam to th point, so littl likd hr going, that h
told hr to writ to him, and almost promisd to answr hr lttr.

Th farwll btwn hrslf and Mr. Wickham was prfctly frindly; on
his sid vn mor. His prsnt pursuit could not mak him forgt that
lizabth had bn th first to xcit and to dsrv his attntion, th
first to listn and to pity, th first to b admird; and in his mannr
of bidding hr adiu, wishing hr vry njoymnt, rminding hr of what
sh was to xpct in Lady Cathrin d Bourgh, and trusting thir
opinion of hr--thir opinion of vrybody--would always coincid, thr
was a solicitud, an intrst, which sh flt must vr attach hr to
him with a most sincr rgard; and sh partd from him convincd, that,
whthr marrid or singl, h must always b hr modl of th amiabl
and plasing.

Hr fllow-travllrs th nxt day wr not of a kind to mak hr think
him lss agrabl. Sir William Lucas, and his daughtr Maria, a
good-humourd girl, but as mpty-hadd as himslf, had nothing to say
that could b worth haring, and wr listnd to with about as much
dlight as th rattl of th chais. lizabth lovd absurditis, but
sh had known Sir William’s too long. H could tll hr nothing nw of
th wondrs of his prsntation and knighthood; and his civilitis wr
worn out, lik his information.

It was a journy of only twnty-four mils, and thy bgan it so arly
as to b in Gracchurch Strt by noon. As thy drov to Mr. Gardinr’s
door, Jan was at a drawing-room window watching thir arrival: whn
thy ntrd th passag, sh was thr to wlcom thm, and lizabth,
looking arnstly in hr fac, was plasd to s it halthful and
lovly as vr. On th stairs wr a troop of littl boys and girls,
whos agrnss for thir cousin’s apparanc would not allow thm to
wait in th drawing-room, and whos shynss, as thy had not sn hr
for a twlvmonth, prvntd thir coming lowr. All was joy and
kindnss. Th day passd most plasantly away; th morning in bustl and
shopping, and th vning at on of th thatrs.

lizabth thn contrivd to sit by hr aunt. Thir first subjct was hr
sistr; and sh was mor grivd than astonishd to har, in rply to
hr minut inquiris, that though Jan always struggld to support hr
spirits, thr wr priods of djction. It was rasonabl, howvr, to
hop that thy would not continu long. Mrs. Gardinr gav hr th
particulars also of Miss Bingly’s visit in Gracchurch Strt, and
rpatd convrsations occurring at diffrnt tims btwn Jan and
hrslf, which provd that th formr had, from hr hart, givn up th
acquaintanc.

Mrs. Gardinr thn rallid hr nic on Wickham’s dsrtion, and
complimntd hr on baring it so wll.

“But, my dar lizabth,” sh addd, “what sort of girl is Miss King? I
should b sorry to think our frind mrcnary.”

“Pray, my dar aunt, what is th diffrnc in matrimonial affairs,
btwn th mrcnary and th prudnt motiv? Whr dos discrtion nd,
and avaric bgin? Last Christmas you wr afraid of his marrying m,
bcaus it would b imprudnt; and now, bcaus h is trying to gt a
girl with only tn thousand pounds, you want to find out that h is
mrcnary.”

“If you will only tll m what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.”

“Sh is a vry good kind of girl, I bliv. I know no harm of hr.”

“But h paid hr not th smallst attntion till hr grandfathr’s dath
mad hr mistrss of this fortun?”

“No--why should h? If it wr not allowabl for him to gain _my_
affctions, bcaus I had no mony, what occasion could thr b for
making lov to a girl whom h did not car about, and who was qually
poor?”

“But thr sms indlicacy in dircting his attntions towards hr so
soon aftr this vnt.”

“A man in distrssd circumstancs has not tim for all thos lgant
dcorums which othr popl may obsrv. If _sh_ dos not objct to it,
why should _w_?”

“_Hr_ not objcting dos not justify _him_. It only shows hr bing
dficint in somthing hrslf--sns or fling.”

“Wll,” crid lizabth, “hav it as you choos. _H_ shall b
mrcnary, and _sh_ shall b foolish.”

“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choos. I should b sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has livd so long in Drbyshir.”

“Oh, if that is all, I hav a vry poor opinion of young mn who liv in
Drbyshir; and thir intimat frinds who liv in Hrtfordshir ar not
much bttr. I am sick of thm all. Thank havn! I am going to-morrow
whr I shall find a man who has not on agrabl quality, who has
nithr mannrs nor sns to rcommnd him. Stupid mn ar th only ons
worth knowing, aftr all.”

“Tak car, Lizzy; that spch savours strongly of disappointmnt.”

Bfor thy wr sparatd by th conclusion of th play, sh had th
unxpctd happinss of an invitation to accompany hr uncl and aunt in
a tour of plasur which thy proposd taking in th summr.

“W hav not quit dtrmind how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs.
Gardinr; “but prhaps, to th Laks.”

No schm could hav bn mor agrabl to lizabth, and hr
accptanc of th invitation was most rady and gratful. “My dar, dar
aunt,” sh rapturously crid, “what dlight! what flicity! You giv m
frsh lif and vigour. Adiu to disappointmnt and spln. What ar mn
to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport w shall spnd! And
whn w _do_ rturn, it shall not b lik othr travllrs, without
bing abl to giv on accurat ida of anything. W _will_ know whr
w hav gon--w _will_ rcollct what w hav sn. Laks, mountains,
and rivrs, shall not b jumbld togthr in our imaginations; nor, whn
w attmpt to dscrib any particular scn, will w bgin quarrlling
about its rlativ situation. Lt _our_ first ffusions b lss
insupportabl than thos of th gnrality of travllrs.”

vry objct in th nxt day’s journy was nw and intrsting to
lizabth; and hr spirits wr in a stat of njoymnt; for sh had
sn hr sistr looking so wll as to banish all far for hr halth,
and th prospct of hr northrn tour was a constant sourc of dlight.

Whn thy lft th high road for th lan to Hunsford, vry y was in
sarch of th Parsonag, and vry turning xpctd to bring it in viw.
Th paling of Rosings park was thir boundary on on sid. lizabth
smild at th rcollction of all that sh had hard of its inhabitants.

At lngth th Parsonag was discrnibl. Th gardn sloping to th
road, th hous standing in it, th grn pals and th laurl hdg,
vrything dclard thy wr arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlott
appard at th door, and th carriag stoppd at th small gat, which
ld by a short gravl walk to th hous, amidst th nods and smils of
th whol party. In a momnt thy wr all out of th chais, rjoicing
at th sight of ach othr. Mrs. Collins wlcomd hr frind with th
livlist plasur, and lizabth was mor and mor satisfid with
coming, whn sh found hrslf so affctionatly rcivd. Sh saw
instantly that hr cousin’s mannrs wr not altrd by his marriag:
his formal civility was just what it had bn; and h dtaind hr som
minuts at th gat to har and satisfy his inquiris aftr all hr
family. Thy wr thn, with no othr dlay than his pointing out th
natnss of th ntranc, takn into th hous; and as soon as thy wr
in th parlour, h wlcomd thm a scond tim, with ostntatious
formality, to his humbl abod, and punctually rpatd all his wif’s
offrs of rfrshmnt.

lizabth was prpard to s him in his glory; and sh could not hlp
fancying that in displaying th good proportion of th room, its aspct,
and its furnitur, h addrssd himslf particularly to hr, as if
wishing to mak hr fl what sh had lost in rfusing him. But though
vrything smd nat and comfortabl, sh was not abl to gratify him
by any sigh of rpntanc; and rathr lookd with wondr at hr frind,
that sh could hav so chrful an air with such a companion. Whn Mr.
Collins said anything of which his wif might rasonably b ashamd,
which crtainly was not sldom, sh involuntarily turnd hr y on
Charlott. Onc or twic sh could discrn a faint blush; but in gnral
Charlott wisly did not har. Aftr sitting long nough to admir
vry articl of furnitur in th room, from th sidboard to th
fndr, to giv an account of thir journy, and of all that had
happnd in London, Mr. Collins invitd thm to tak a stroll in th
gardn, which was larg and wll laid out, and to th cultivation of
which h attndd himslf. To work in his gardn was on of his most
rspctabl plasurs; and lizabth admird th command of countnanc
with which Charlott talkd of th halthfulnss of th xrcis, and
ownd sh ncouragd it as much as possibl. Hr, lading th way
through vry walk and cross walk, and scarcly allowing thm an
intrval to uttr th praiss h askd for, vry viw was pointd out
with a minutnss which lft bauty ntirly bhind. H could numbr th
filds in vry dirction, and could tll how many trs thr wr in
th most distant clump. But of all th viws which his gardn, or which
th country or th kingdom could boast, non wr to b compard with
th prospct of Rosings, affordd by an opning in th trs that
bordrd th park narly opposit th front of his hous. It was a
handsom modrn building, wll situatd on rising ground.

From his gardn, Mr. Collins would hav ld thm round his two madows;
but th ladis, not having shos to ncountr th rmains of a whit
frost, turnd back; and whil Sir William accompanid him, Charlott
took hr sistr and frind ovr th hous, xtrmly wll plasd,
probably, to hav th opportunity of showing it without hr husband’s
hlp. It was rathr small, but wll built and convnint; and vrything
was fittd up and arrangd with a natnss and consistncy, of which
lizabth gav Charlott all th crdit. Whn Mr. Collins could b
forgottn, thr was rally a grat air of comfort throughout, and by
Charlott’s vidnt njoymnt of it, lizabth supposd h must b oftn
forgottn.

Sh had alrady larnt that Lady Cathrin was still in th country. It
was spokn of again whil thy wr at dinnr, whn Mr. Collins joining
in, obsrvd,--

“Ys, Miss lizabth, you will hav th honour of sing Lady Cathrin
d Bourgh on th nsuing Sunday at church, and I nd not say you will
b dlightd with hr. Sh is all affability and condscnsion, and I
doubt not but you will b honourd with som portion of hr notic whn
srvic is ovr. I hav scarcly any hsitation in saying that sh will
includ you and my sistr Maria in vry invitation with which sh
honours us during your stay hr. Hr bhaviour to my dar Charlott is
charming. W din at Rosings twic vry wk, and ar nvr allowd to
walk hom. Hr Ladyship’s carriag is rgularly ordrd for us. I
_should_ say, on of hr Ladyship’s carriags, for sh has svral.”

“Lady Cathrin is a vry rspctabl, snsibl woman, indd,” addd
Charlott, “and a most attntiv nighbour.”

“Vry tru, my dar, that is xactly what I say. Sh is th sort of
woman whom on cannot rgard with too much dfrnc.”

Th vning was spnt chifly in talking ovr Hrtfordshir nws, and
tlling again what had bn alrady writtn; and whn it closd,
lizabth, in th solitud of hr chambr, had to mditat upon
Charlott’s dgr of contntmnt, to undrstand hr addrss in guiding,
and composur in baring with, hr husband, and to acknowldg that it
was all don vry wll. Sh had also to anticipat how hr visit would
pass, th quit tnour of thir usual mploymnts, th vxatious
intrruptions of Mr. Collins, and th gaitis of thir intrcours
with Rosings. A livly imagination soon sttld it all.

About th middl of th nxt day, as sh was in hr room gtting rady
for a walk, a suddn nois blow smd to spak th whol hous in
confusion; and, aftr listning a momnt, sh hard sombody running
upstairs in a violnt hurry, and calling loudly aftr hr. Sh opnd
th door, and mt Maria in th landing-plac, who, brathlss with
agitation, crid out,--

“Oh, my dar liza! pray mak hast and com into th dining-room, for
thr is such a sight to b sn! I will not tll you what it is. Mak
hast, and com down this momnt.”

lizabth askd qustions in vain; Maria would tll hr nothing mor;
and down thy ran into th dining-room which frontd th lan, in qust
of this wondr; it was two ladis, stopping in a low phaton at th
gardn gat.

“And is this all?” crid lizabth. “I xpctd at last that th pigs
wr got into th gardn, and hr is nothing but Lady Cathrin and hr
daughtr!”

“La! my dar,” said Maria, quit shockd at th mistak, “it is not Lady
Cathrin. Th old lady is Mrs. Jnkinson, who livs with thm. Th
othr is Miss D Bourgh. Only look at hr. Sh is quit a littl
cratur. Who would hav thought sh could b so thin and small!”

“Sh is abominably rud to kp Charlott out of doors in all this wind.
Why dos sh not com in?”

“Oh, Charlott says sh hardly vr dos. It is th gratst of favours
whn Miss D Bourgh coms in.”

“I lik hr apparanc,” said lizabth, struck with othr idas. “Sh
looks sickly and cross. Ys, sh will do for him vry wll. Sh will
mak him a vry propr wif.”

Mr. Collins and Charlott wr both standing at th gat in convrsation
with th ladis; and Sir William, to lizabth’s high divrsion, was
stationd in th doorway, in arnst contmplation of th gratnss
bfor him, and constantly bowing whnvr Miss D Bourgh lookd that
way.

At lngth thr was nothing mor to b said; th ladis drov on, and
th othrs rturnd into th hous. Mr. Collins no soonr saw th two
girls than h bgan to congratulat thm on thir good fortun, which
Charlott xplaind by ltting thm know that th whol party was askd
to din at Rosings th nxt day.

Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consqunc of this invitation, was complt.
Th powr of displaying th grandur of his patronss to his wondring
visitors, and of ltting thm s hr civility towards himslf and his
wif, was xactly what h had wishd for; and that an opportunity of
doing it should b givn so soon was such an instanc of Lady
Cathrin’s condscnsion as h knw not how to admir nough.

“I confss,” said h, “that I should not hav bn at all surprisd by
hr Ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink ta and spnd th vning
at Rosings. I rathr xpctd, from my knowldg of hr affability, that
it would happn. But who could hav forsn such an attntion as this?
Who could hav imagind that w should rciv an invitation to din
thr (an invitation, morovr, including th whol party) so
immdiatly aftr your arrival?”

“I am th lss surprisd at what has happnd,” rplid Sir William,
“from that knowldg of what th mannrs of th grat rally ar, which
my situation in lif has allowd m to acquir. About th court, such
instancs of lgant brding ar not uncommon.”

Scarcly anything was talkd of th whol day or nxt morning but thir
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carfully instructing thm in what
thy wr to xpct, that th sight of such rooms, so many srvants, and
so splndid a dinnr, might not wholly ovrpowr thm.

Whn th ladis wr sparating for th toiltt, h said to
lizabth,--

“Do not mak yourslf unasy, my dar cousin, about your apparl. Lady
Cathrin is far from rquiring that lganc of drss in us which
bcoms hrslf and daughtr. I would advis you mrly to put on
whatvr of your cloths is suprior to th rst--thr is no occasion
for anything mor. Lady Cathrin will not think th wors of you for
bing simply drssd. Sh liks to hav th distinction of rank
prsrvd.”

Whil thy wr drssing, h cam two or thr tims to thir diffrnt
doors, to rcommnd thir bing quick, as Lady Cathrin vry much
objctd to b kpt waiting for hr dinnr. Such formidabl accounts of
hr Ladyship, and hr mannr of living, quit frightnd Maria Lucas,
who had bn littl usd to company; and sh lookd forward to hr
introduction at Rosings with as much apprhnsion as hr fathr had don
to his prsntation at St. Jams’s.

As th wathr was fin, thy had a plasant walk of about half a mil
across th park. vry park has its bauty and its prospcts; and
lizabth saw much to b plasd with, though sh could not b in such
rapturs as Mr. Collins xpctd th scn to inspir, and was but
slightly affctd by his numration of th windows in front of th
hous, and his rlation of what th glazing altogthr had originally
cost Sir Lwis d Bourgh.

Whn thy ascndd th stps to th hall, Maria’s alarm was vry momnt
incrasing, and vn Sir William did not look prfctly calm.
lizabth’s courag did not fail hr. Sh had hard nothing of Lady
Cathrin that spok hr awful from any xtraordinary talnts or
miraculous virtu, and th mr statlinss of mony and rank sh
thought sh could witnss without trpidation.

From th ntranc hall, of which Mr. Collins pointd out, with a
rapturous air, th fin proportion and finishd ornamnts, thy followd
th srvants through an antchambr to th room whr Lady Cathrin,
hr daughtr, and Mrs. Jnkinson wr sitting. Hr Ladyship, with grat
condscnsion, aros to rciv thm; and as Mrs. Collins had sttld it
with hr husband that th offic of introduction should b hrs, it was
prformd in a propr mannr, without any of thos apologis and thanks
which h would hav thought ncssary.

In spit of having bn at St. Jams’s, Sir William was so compltly
awd by th grandur surrounding him, that h had but just courag
nough to mak a vry low bow, and tak his sat without saying a word;
and his daughtr, frightnd almost out of hr snss, sat on th dg
of hr chair, not knowing which way to look. lizabth found hrslf
quit qual to th scn, and could obsrv th thr ladis bfor hr
composdly. Lady Cathrin was a tall, larg woman, with strongly-markd
faturs, which might onc hav bn handsom. Hr air was not
conciliating, nor was hr mannr of rciving thm such as to mak hr
visitors forgt thir infrior rank. Sh was not rndrd formidabl by
silnc: but whatvr sh said was spokn in so authoritativ a ton as
markd hr slf-importanc, and brought Mr. Wickham immdiatly to
lizabth’s mind; and, from th obsrvation of th day altogthr, sh
blivd Lady Cathrin to b xactly what h had rprsntd.

Whn, aftr xamining th mothr, in whos countnanc and dportmnt
sh soon found som rsmblanc of Mr. Darcy, sh turnd hr ys on th
daughtr, sh could almost hav joind in Maria’s astonishmnt at hr
bing so thin and so small. Thr was nithr in figur nor fac any
liknss btwn th ladis. Miss d Bourgh was pal and sickly: hr
faturs, though not plain, wr insignificant; and sh spok vry
littl, xcpt in a low voic, to Mrs. Jnkinson, in whos apparanc
thr was nothing rmarkabl, and who was ntirly ngagd in listning
to what sh said, and placing a scrn in th propr dirction bfor
hr ys.

Aftr sitting a fw minuts, thy wr all snt to on of th windows to
admir th viw, Mr. Collins attnding thm to point out its bautis,
and Lady Cathrin kindly informing thm that it was much bttr worth
looking at in th summr.

Th dinnr was xcdingly handsom, and thr wr all th srvants,
and all th articls of plat which Mr. Collins had promisd; and, as h
had likwis fortold, h took his sat at th bottom of th tabl, by
hr Ladyship’s dsir, and lookd as if h flt that lif could furnish
nothing gratr. H carvd and at and praisd with dlightd alacrity;
and vry dish was commndd first by him, and thn by Sir William, who
was now nough rcovrd to cho whatvr his son-in-law said, in a
mannr which lizabth wondrd Lady Cathrin could bar. But Lady
Cathrin smd gratifid by thir xcssiv admiration, and gav most
gracious smils, spcially whn any dish on th tabl provd a novlty
to thm. Th party did not supply much convrsation. lizabth was rady
to spak whnvr thr was an opning, but sh was satd btwn
Charlott and Miss d Bourgh--th formr of whom was ngagd in
listning to Lady Cathrin, and th lattr said not a word to hr all
th dinnrtim. Mrs. Jnkinson was chifly mployd in watching how
littl Miss d Bourgh at, prssing hr to try som othr dish and
faring sh was indisposd. Maria thought spaking out of th qustion,
and th gntlmn did nothing but at and admir.

Whn th ladis rturnd to th drawing-room, thr was littl to b
don but to har Lady Cathrin talk, which sh did without any
intrmission till coff cam in, dlivring hr opinion on vry
subjct in so dcisiv a mannr as provd that sh was not usd to hav
hr judgmnt controvrtd. Sh inquird into Charlott’s domstic
concrns familiarly and minutly, and gav hr a grat dal of advic as
to th managmnt of thm all; told hr how vrything ought to b
rgulatd in so small a family as hrs, and instructd hr as to th
car of hr cows and hr poultry. lizabth found that nothing was
bnath this grat lady’s attntion which could furnish hr with an
occasion for dictating to othrs. In th intrvals of hr discours with
Mrs. Collins, sh addrssd a varity of qustions to Maria and
lizabth, but spcially to th lattr, of whos connctions sh knw
th last, and who, sh obsrvd to Mrs. Collins, was a vry gntl,
prtty kind of girl. Sh askd hr at diffrnt tims how many sistrs
sh had, whthr thy wr oldr or youngr than hrslf, whthr any of
thm wr likly to b marrid, whthr thy wr handsom, whr thy
had bn ducatd, what carriag hr fathr kpt, and what had bn hr
mothr’s maidn nam? lizabth flt all th imprtinnc of hr
qustions, but answrd thm vry composdly. Lady Cathrin thn
obsrvd,--

“Your fathr’s stat is ntaild on Mr. Collins, I think? For your
sak,” turning to Charlott, “I am glad of it; but othrwis I s no
occasion for ntailing stats from th fmal lin. It was not thought
ncssary in Sir Lwis d Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bnnt?”

“A littl.”

“Oh thn--som tim or othr w shall b happy to har you. Our
instrumnt is a capital on, probably suprior to ---- you shall try it
som day. Do your sistrs play and sing?”

“On of thm dos.”

“Why did not you all larn? You ought all to hav larnd. Th Miss
Wbbs all play, and thir fathr has not so good an incom as yours. Do
you draw?”

“No, not at all.”

“What, non of you?”

“Not on.”

“That is vry strang. But I suppos you had no opportunity. Your mothr
should hav takn you to town vry spring for th bnfit of mastrs.”

“My mothr would hav no objction, but my fathr hats London.”

“Has your govrnss lft you?”

“W nvr had any govrnss.”

“No govrnss! How was that possibl? Fiv daughtrs brought up at hom
without a govrnss! I nvr hard of such a thing. Your mothr must
hav bn quit a slav to your ducation.”

lizabth could hardly hlp smiling, as sh assurd hr that had not
bn th cas.

“Thn who taught you? who attndd to you? Without a govrnss, you must
hav bn nglctd.”

“Compard with som familis, I bliv w wr; but such of us as
wishd to larn nvr wantd th mans. W wr always ncouragd to
rad, and had all th mastrs that wr ncssary. Thos who chos to b
idl crtainly might.”

“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a govrnss will prvnt; and if I had
known your mothr, I should hav advisd hr most strnuously to ngag
on. I always say that nothing is to b don in ducation without stady
and rgular instruction, and nobody but a govrnss can giv it. It is
wondrful how many familis I hav bn th mans of supplying in that
way. I am always glad to gt a young prson wll placd out. Four nics
of Mrs. Jnkinson ar most dlightfully situatd through my mans; and
it was but th othr day that I rcommndd anothr young prson, who
was mrly accidntally mntiond to m, and th family ar quit
dlightd with hr. Mrs. Collins, did I tll you of Lady Mtcalf’s
calling ystrday to thank m? Sh finds Miss Pop a trasur. ‘Lady
Cathrin,’ said sh, ‘you hav givn m a trasur.’ Ar any of your
youngr sistrs out, Miss Bnnt?”

“Ys, ma’am, all.”

“All! What, all fiv out at onc? Vry odd! And you only th scond. Th
youngr ons out bfor th ldr ar marrid! Your youngr sistrs must
b vry young?”

“Ys, my youngst is not sixtn. Prhaps _sh_ is full young to b much
in company. But rally, ma’am, I think it would b vry hard upon
youngr sistrs that thy should not hav thir shar of socity and
amusmnt, bcaus th ldr may not hav th mans or inclination to
marry arly. Th last born has as good a right to th plasurs of youth
as th first. And to b kpt back on _such_ a motiv! I think it would
not b vry likly to promot sistrly affction or dlicacy of mind.”

“Upon my word,” said hr Ladyship, “you giv your opinion vry dciddly
for so young a prson. Pray, what is your ag?”

“With thr youngr sistrs grown up,” rplid lizabth, smiling, “your
Ladyship can hardly xpct m to own it.”

Lady Cathrin smd quit astonishd at not rciving a dirct answr;
and lizabth suspctd hrslf to b th first cratur who had vr
dard to trifl with so much dignifid imprtinnc.

“You cannot b mor than twnty, I am sur,--thrfor you nd not
concal your ag.”

“I am not on-and-twnty.”

Whn th gntlmn had joind thm, and ta was ovr, th card tabls
wr placd. Lady Cathrin, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrill; and as Miss D Bourgh chos to play at cassino, th
two girls had th honour of assisting Mrs. Jnkinson to mak up hr
party. Thir tabl was suprlativly stupid. Scarcly a syllabl was
uttrd that did not rlat to th gam, xcpt whn Mrs. Jnkinson
xprssd hr fars of Miss D Bourgh’s bing too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too littl light. A grat dal mor passd at th
othr tabl. Lady Cathrin was gnrally spaking--stating th mistaks
of th thr othrs, or rlating som ancdot of hrslf. Mr. Collins
was mployd in agring to vrything hr Ladyship said, thanking hr
for vry fish h won, and apologizing if h thought h won too many.
Sir William did not say much. H was storing his mmory with ancdots
and nobl nams.

Whn Lady Cathrin and hr daughtr had playd as long as thy chos,
th tabls wr brokn up, th carriag was offrd to Mrs. Collins,
gratfully accptd, and immdiatly ordrd. Th party thn gathrd
round th fir to har Lady Cathrin dtrmin what wathr thy wr
to hav on th morrow. From ths instructions thy wr summond by th
arrival of th coach; and with many spchs of thankfulnss on Mr.
Collins’s sid, and as many bows on Sir William’s, thy dpartd. As
soon as thy had drivn from th door, lizabth was calld on by hr
cousin to giv hr opinion of all that sh had sn at Rosings, which,
for Charlott’s sak, sh mad mor favourabl than it rally was. But
hr commndation, though costing hr som troubl, could by no mans
satisfy Mr. Collins, and h was vry soon obligd to tak hr Ladyship’s
prais into his own hands.

Sir William stayd only a wk at Hunsford; but his visit was long
nough to convinc him of his daughtr’s bing most comfortably sttld,
and of hr possssing such a husband and such a nighbour as wr not
oftn mt with. Whil Sir William was with thm, Mr. Collins dvotd his
mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him th country: but
whn h wnt away, th whol family rturnd to thir usual mploymnts,
and lizabth was thankful to find that thy did not s mor of hr
cousin by th altration; for th chif of th tim btwn brakfast
and dinnr was now passd by him ithr at work in th gardn, or in
rading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room,
which frontd th road. Th room in which th ladis sat was backwards.
lizabth at first had rathr wondrd that Charlott should not prfr
th dining parlour for common us; it was a bttr sizd room, and had a
plasantr aspct: but sh soon saw that hr frind had an xcllnt
rason for what sh did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtdly hav bn
much lss in his own apartmnt had thy sat in on qually livly; and
sh gav Charlott crdit for th arrangmnt.

From th drawing-room thy could distinguish nothing in th lan, and
wr indbtd to Mr. Collins for th knowldg of what carriags wnt
along, and how oftn spcially Miss D Bourgh drov by in hr phaton,
which h nvr faild coming to inform thm of, though it happnd
almost vry day. Sh not unfrquntly stoppd at th Parsonag, and had
a fw minuts’ convrsation with Charlott, but was scarcly vr
prvaild on to gt out.

Vry fw days passd in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wif did not think it ncssary to go likwis;
and till lizabth rcollctd that thr might b othr family livings
to b disposd of, sh could not undrstand th sacrific of so many
hours. Now and thn thy wr honourd with a call from hr Ladyship,
and nothing scapd hr obsrvation that was passing in th room during
ths visits. Sh xamind into thir mploymnts, lookd at thir work,
and advisd thm to do it diffrntly; found fault with th arrangmnt
of th furnitur, or dtctd th housmaid in nglignc; and if sh
accptd any rfrshmnt, smd to do it only for th sak of finding
out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of mat wr too larg for hr family.

lizabth soon prcivd, that though this grat lady was not in th
commission of th pac for th county, sh was a most activ magistrat
in hr own parish, th minutst concrns of which wr carrid to hr by
Mr. Collins; and whnvr any of th cottagrs wr disposd to b
quarrlsom, discontntd, or too poor, sh sallid forth into th
villag to sttl thir diffrncs, silnc thir complaints, and scold
thm into harmony and plnty.

Th ntrtainmnt of dining at Rosings was rpatd about twic a wk;
and, allowing for th loss of Sir William, and thr bing only on
card-tabl in th vning, vry such ntrtainmnt was th countrpart
of th first. Thir othr ngagmnts wr fw, as th styl of living
of th nighbourhood in gnral was byond th Collinss’ rach. This,
howvr, was no vil to lizabth, and upon th whol sh spnt hr tim
comfortably nough: thr wr half hours of plasant convrsation with
Charlott, and th wathr was so fin for th tim of yar, that sh
had oftn grat njoymnt out of doors. Hr favourit walk, and whr
sh frquntly wnt whil th othrs wr calling on Lady Cathrin, was
along th opn grov which dgd that sid of th park, whr thr was
a nic shltrd path, which no on smd to valu but hrslf, and
whr sh flt byond th rach of Lady Cathrin’s curiosity.

In this quit way th first fortnight of hr visit soon passd away.
astr was approaching, and th wk prcding it was to bring an
addition to th family at Rosings, which in so small a circl must b
important. lizabth had hard, soon aftr hr arrival, that Mr. Darcy
was xpctd thr in th cours of a fw wks; and though thr wr
not many of hr acquaintanc whom sh did not prfr, his coming would
furnish on comparativly nw to look at in thir Rosings partis, and
sh might b amusd in sing how hoplss Miss Bingly’s dsigns on him
wr, by his bhaviour to his cousin, for whom h was vidntly dstind
by Lady Cathrin, who talkd of his coming with th gratst
satisfaction, spok of him in trms of th highst admiration, and
smd almost angry to find that h had alrady bn frquntly sn by
Miss Lucas and hrslf.

His arrival was soon known at th Parsonag; for Mr. Collins was walking
th whol morning within viw of th lodgs opning into Hunsford Lan,
in ordr to hav

th arlist assuranc of it; and, aftr making his bow as th carriag
turnd into th park, hurrid hom with th grat intllignc. On th
following morning h hastnd to Rosings to pay his rspcts. Thr wr
two nphws of Lady Cathrin to rquir thm, for Mr. Darcy had brought
with him a Colonl Fitzwilliam, th youngr son of his uncl, Lord ----;
and, to th grat surpris of all th party, whn Mr. Collins rturnd,
th gntlmn accompanid him. Charlott had sn thm from hr
husband’s room, crossing th road, and immdiatly running into th
othr, told th girls what an honour thy might xpct, adding,--

“I may thank you, liza, for this pic of civility. Mr. Darcy would
nvr hav com so soon to wait upon m.”

lizabth had scarcly tim to disclaim all right to th complimnt
bfor thir approach was announcd by th door-bll, and shortly
aftrwards th thr gntlmn ntrd th room. Colonl Fitzwilliam,
who ld th way, was about thirty, not handsom, but in prson and
addrss most truly th gntlman. Mr. Darcy lookd just as h had bn
usd to look in Hrtfordshir, paid his complimnts, with his usual
rsrv, to Mrs. Collins; and whatvr might b his flings towards hr
frind, mt hr with vry apparanc of composur. lizabth mrly
courtsid to him, without saying a word.

Colonl Fitzwilliam ntrd into convrsation dirctly, with th
radinss and as of a wll-brd man, and talkd vry plasantly; but
his cousin, aftr having addrssd a slight obsrvation on th hous and
gardn to Mrs. Collins, sat for som tim without spaking to anybody.
At lngth, howvr, his civility was so far awaknd as to inquir of
lizabth aftr th halth of hr family. Sh answrd him in th usual
way; and, aftr a momnt’s paus, addd,--

“My ldst sistr has bn in town ths thr months. Hav you nvr
happnd to s hr thr?”

Sh was prfctly snsibl that h nvr had: but sh wishd to s
whthr h would btray any consciousnss of what had passd btwn th
Binglys and Jan; and sh thought h lookd a littl confusd as h
answrd that h had nvr bn so fortunat as to mt Miss Bnnt. Th
subjct was pursud no furthr, and th gntlmn soon aftrwards wnt
away.

Colonl Fitzwilliam’s mannrs wr vry much admird at th Parsonag,
and th ladis all flt that h must add considrably to th plasur of
thir ngagmnts at Rosings. It was som days, howvr, bfor thy
rcivd any invitation thithr, for whil thr wr visitors in th
hous thy could not b ncssary; and it was not till astr-day,
almost a wk aftr th gntlmn’s arrival, that thy wr honourd by
such an attntion, and thn thy wr mrly askd on laving church to
com thr in th vning. For th last wk thy had sn vry littl
of ithr Lady Cathrin or hr daughtr. Colonl Fitzwilliam had calld
at th Parsonag mor than onc during th tim, but Mr. Darcy thy had
only sn at church.

Th invitation was accptd, of cours, and at a propr hour thy joind
th party in Lady Cathrin’s drawing-room. Hr Ladyship rcivd thm
civilly, but it was plain that thir company was by no mans so
accptabl as whn sh could gt nobody ls; and sh was, in fact,
almost ngrossd by hr nphws, spaking to thm, spcially to Darcy,
much mor than to any othr prson in th room.

Colonl Fitzwilliam smd rally glad to s thm: anything was a
wlcom rlif to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s prtty frind had,
morovr, caught his fancy vry much. H now satd himslf by hr, and
talkd so agrably of Knt and Hrtfordshir, of travlling and staying
at hom, of nw books and music, that lizabth had nvr bn half so
wll ntrtaind in that room bfor; and thy convrsd with so much
spirit and flow as to draw th attntion of Lady Cathrin hrslf, as
wll as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ ys had bn soon and rpatdly turnd
towards thm with a look of curiosity; and that hr Ladyship, aftr a
whil, shard th fling, was mor opnly acknowldgd, for sh did not
scrupl to call out,--

“What is that you ar saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you ar talking
of? What ar you tlling Miss Bnnt? Lt m har what it is.”

“W wr talking of music, madam,” said h, whn no longr abl to avoid
a rply.

“Of music! Thn pray spak aloud. It is of all subjcts my dlight. I
must hav my shar in th convrsation, if you ar spaking of music.
Thr ar fw popl in ngland, I suppos, who hav mor tru
njoymnt of music than myslf, or a bttr natural tast. If I had vr
larnt, I should hav bn a grat proficint. And so would Ann, if hr
halth had allowd hr to apply. I am confidnt that sh would hav
prformd dlightfully. How dos Gorgiana gt on, Darcy?”

Mr. Darcy spok with affctionat prais of his sistr’s proficincy.

“I am vry glad to har such a good account of hr,” said Lady
Cathrin; “and pray tll hr from m, that sh cannot xpct to xcl,
if sh dos not practis a grat dal.”

“I assur you, madam,” h rplid, “that sh dos not nd such advic.
Sh practiss vry constantly.”

“So much th bttr. It cannot b don too much; and whn I nxt writ
to hr, I shall charg hr not to nglct it on any account. I oftn
tll young ladis, that no xcllnc in music is to b acquird without
constant practic. I hav told Miss Bnnt svral tims, that sh will
nvr play rally wll, unlss sh practiss mor; and though Mrs.
Collins has no instrumnt, sh is vry wlcom, as I hav oftn told
hr, to com to Rosings vry day, and play on th pianofort in Mrs.
Jnkinson’s room. Sh would b in nobody’s way, you know, in that part
of th hous.”

Mr. Darcy lookd a littl ashamd of his aunt’s ill-brding, and mad
no answr.

Whn coff was ovr, Colonl Fitzwilliam rmindd lizabth of having
promisd to play to him; and sh sat down dirctly to th instrumnt. H
drw a chair nar hr. Lady Cathrin listnd to half a song, and thn
talkd, as bfor, to hr othr nphw; till th lattr walkd away from
hr, and moving with his usual dlibration towards th pianofort,
stationd himslf so as to command a full viw of th fair prformr’s
countnanc. lizabth saw what h was doing, and at th first
convnint paus turnd to him with an arch smil, and said,--

“You man to frightn m, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this stat to har
m. But I will not b alarmd, though your sistr _dos_ play so wll.
Thr is a stubbornnss about m that nvr can bar to b frightnd at
th will of othrs. My courag always riss with vry attmpt to
intimidat m.”

“I shall not say that you ar mistakn,” h rplid, “bcaus you could
not rally bliv m to ntrtain any dsign of alarming you; and I
hav had th plasur of your acquaintanc long nough to know, that you
find grat njoymnt in occasionally profssing opinions which, in fact,
ar not your own.”

lizabth laughd hartily at this pictur of hrslf, and said to
Colonl Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will giv you a vry prtty notion of
m, and tach you not to bliv a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
in mting with a prson so wll abl to xpos my ral charactr, in a
part of th world whr I had hopd to pass myslf off with som dgr
of crdit. Indd, Mr. Darcy, it is vry ungnrous in you to mntion
all that you knw to my disadvantag in Hrtfordshir--and, giv m
lav to say, vry impolitic too--for it is provoking m to rtaliat,
and such things may com out as will shock your rlations to har.”

“I am not afraid of you,” said h, smilingly.

“Pray lt m har what you hav to accus him of,” crid Colonl
Fitzwilliam. “I should lik to know how h bhavs among strangrs.”

“You shall har, thn--but prpar for somthing vry dradful. Th
first tim of my vr sing him in Hrtfordshir, you must know, was at
a ball--and at this ball, what do you think h did? H dancd only four
dancs! I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. H dancd only four
dancs, though gntlmn wr scarc; and, to my crtain knowldg, mor
than on young lady was sitting down in want of a partnr. Mr. Darcy,
you cannot dny th fact.”

“I had not at that tim th honour of knowing any lady in th assmbly
byond my own party.”

“Tru; and nobody can vr b introducd in a ball-room. Wll, Colonl
Fitzwilliam, what do I play nxt? My fingrs wait your ordrs.”

“Prhaps,” said Darcy, “I should hav judgd bttr had I sought an
introduction, but I am ill-qualifid to rcommnd myslf to strangrs.”

“Shall w ask your cousin th rason of this?” said lizabth, still
addrssing Colonl Fitzwilliam. “Shall w ask him why a man of sns and
ducation, and who has livd in th world, is ill-qualifid to rcommnd
himslf to strangrs?”

“I can answr your qustion,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to
him. It is bcaus h will not giv himslf th troubl.”

“I crtainly hav not th talnt which som popl possss,” said Darcy,
“of convrsing asily with thos I hav nvr sn bfor. I cannot
catch thir ton of convrsation, or appar intrstd in thir
concrns, as I oftn s don.”

“My fingrs,” said lizabth, “do not mov ovr this instrumnt in th
mastrly mannr which I s so many womn’s do. Thy hav not th sam
forc or rapidity, and do not produc th sam xprssion. But thn I
hav always supposd it to b my own fault--bcaus I would not tak
th troubl of practising. It is not that I do not bliv _my_ fingrs
as capabl as any othr woman’s of suprior xcution.”

Darcy smild and said, “You ar prfctly right. You hav mployd your
tim much bttr. No on admittd to th privilg of haring you can
think anything wanting. W nithr of us prform to strangrs.”

Hr thy wr intrruptd by Lady Cathrin, who calld out to know
what thy wr talking of. lizabth immdiatly bgan playing again.
Lady Cathrin approachd, and, aftr listning for a fw minuts, said
to Darcy,--

“Miss Bnnt would not play at all amiss if sh practisd mor, and
could hav th advantag of a London mastr. Sh has a vry good notion
of fingring, though hr tast is not qual to Ann’s. Ann would hav
bn a dlightful prformr, had hr halth allowd hr to larn.”

lizabth lookd at Darcy, to s how cordially h assntd to his
cousin’s prais: but nithr at that momnt nor at any othr could sh
discrn any symptom of lov; and from th whol of his bhaviour to Miss
D Bourgh sh drivd this comfort for Miss Bingly, that h might hav
bn just as likly to marry _hr_, had sh bn his rlation.

Lady Cathrin continud hr rmarks on lizabth’s prformanc, mixing
with thm many instructions on xcution and tast. lizabth rcivd
thm with all th forbaranc of civility; and at th rqust of th
gntlmn rmaind at th instrumnt till hr Ladyship’s carriag was
rady to tak thm all hom.

lizabth was sitting by hrslf th nxt morning, and writing to Jan,
whil Mrs. Collins and Maria wr gon on businss into th villag,
whn sh was startld by a ring at th door, th crtain signal of a
visitor. As sh had hard no carriag, sh thought it not unlikly to b
Lady Cathrin; and undr that apprhnsion was putting away hr
half-finishd lttr, that sh might scap all imprtinnt qustions,
whn th door opnd, and to hr vry grat surpris Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
Darcy only, ntrd th room.

H smd astonishd too on finding hr alon, and apologizd for his
intrusion, by ltting hr know that h had undrstood all th ladis to
b within.

Thy thn sat down, and whn hr inquiris aftr Rosings wr mad,
smd in dangr of sinking into total silnc. It was absolutly
ncssary, thrfor, to think of somthing; and in this mrgncy
rcollcting _whn_ sh had sn him last in Hrtfordshir, and fling
curious to know what h would say on th subjct of thir hasty
dpartur, sh obsrvd,--

“How vry suddnly you all quittd Nthrfild last Novmbr, Mr. Darcy!
It must hav bn a most agrabl surpris to Mr. Bingly to s you
all aftr him so soon; for, if I rcollct right, h wnt but th day
bfor. H and his sistrs wr wll, I hop, whn you lft London?”

“Prfctly so, I thank you.”

Sh found that sh was to rciv no othr answr; and, aftr a short
paus, addd,--

“I think I hav undrstood that Mr. Bingly has not much ida of vr
rturning to Nthrfild again?”

“I hav nvr hard him say so; but it is probabl that h may spnd
vry littl of his tim thr in futur. H has many frinds, and h is
at a tim of lif whn frinds and ngagmnts ar continually
incrasing.”

“If h mans to b but littl at Nthrfild, it would b bttr for th
nighbourhood that h should giv up th plac ntirly, for thn w
might possibly gt a sttld family thr. But, prhaps, Mr. Bingly did
not tak th hous so much for th convninc of th nighbourhood as
for his own, and w must xpct him to kp or quit it on th sam
principl.”

“I should not b surprisd,” said Darcy, “if h wr to giv it up as
soon as any ligibl purchas offrs.”

lizabth mad no answr. Sh was afraid of talking longr of his
frind; and, having nothing ls to say, was now dtrmind to lav th
troubl of finding a subjct to him.

H took th hint and soon bgan with, “This sms a vry comfortabl
hous. Lady Cathrin, I bliv, did a grat dal to it whn Mr.
Collins first cam to Hunsford.”

“I bliv sh did--and I am sur sh could not hav bstowd hr
kindnss on a mor gratful objct.”

“Mr. Collins appars vry fortunat in his choic of a wif.”

“Ys, indd; his frinds may wll rjoic in his having mt with on of
th vry fw snsibl womn who would hav accptd him, or hav mad
him happy if thy had. My frind has an xcllnt undrstanding--though
I am not crtain that I considr hr marrying Mr. Collins as th wisst
thing sh vr did. Sh sms prfctly happy, howvr; and, in a
prudntial light, it is crtainly a vry good match for hr.”

“It must b vry agrabl to hr to b sttld within so asy a
distanc of hr own family and frinds.”

“An asy distanc do you call it? It is narly fifty mils.”

“And what is fifty mils of good road? Littl mor than half a day’s
journy. Ys, I call it a vry asy distanc.”

“I should nvr hav considrd th distanc as on of th _advantags_
of th match,” crid lizabth. “I should nvr hav said Mrs. Collins
was sttld _nar_ hr family.”

“It is a proof of your own attachmnt to Hrtfordshir. Anything byond
th vry nighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppos, would appar far.”

As h spok thr was a sort of smil, which lizabth fancid sh
undrstood; h must b supposing hr to b thinking of Jan and
Nthrfild, and sh blushd as sh answrd,--

“I do not man to say that a woman may not b sttld too nar hr
family. Th far and th nar must b rlativ, and dpnd on many
varying circumstancs. Whr thr is fortun to mak th xpns of
travlling unimportant, distanc bcoms no vil. But that is not th
cas _hr_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins hav a comfortabl incom, but not
such a on as will allow of frqunt journys--and I am prsuadd my
frind would not call hrslf _nar_ hr family undr lss than _half_
th prsnt distanc.”

Mr. Darcy drw his chair a littl towards hr, and said, “_You_ cannot
hav a right to such vry strong local attachmnt. _You_ cannot hav
bn always at Longbourn.”

lizabth lookd surprisd. Th gntlman xprincd som chang of
fling; h drw back his chair, took a nwspapr from th tabl, and,
glancing ovr it, said, in a coldr voic,--

“Ar you plasd with Knt?”

A short dialogu on th subjct of th country nsud, on ithr sid
calm and concis--and soon put an nd to by th ntranc of Charlott
and hr sistr, just rturnd from thir walk. Th _têt-à-têt_
surprisd thm. Mr. Darcy rlatd th mistak which had occasiond his
intruding on Miss Bnnt, and, aftr sitting a fw minuts longr,
without saying much to anybody, wnt away.

“What can b th maning of this?” said Charlott, as soon as h was
gon. “My dar liza, h must b in lov with you, or h would nvr
hav calld on us in this familiar way.”

But whn lizabth told of his silnc, it did not sm vry likly,
vn to Charlott’s wishs, to b th cas; and, aftr various
conjcturs, thy could at last only suppos his visit to procd from
th difficulty of finding anything to do, which was th mor probabl
from th tim of yar. All fild sports wr ovr. Within doors thr
was Lady Cathrin, books, and a billiard tabl, but gntlmn cannot b
always within doors; and in th narnss of th Parsonag, or th
plasantnss of th walk to it, or of th popl who livd in it, th
two cousins found a tmptation from this priod of walking thithr
almost vry day. Thy calld at various tims of th morning, somtims
sparatly, somtims togthr, and now and thn accompanid by thir
aunt. It was plain to thm all that Colonl Fitzwilliam cam bcaus h
had plasur in thir socity, a prsuasion which of cours rcommndd
him still mor; and lizabth was rmindd by hr own satisfaction in
bing with him, as wll as by his vidnt admiration, of hr formr
favourit, Gorg Wickham; and though, in comparing thm, sh saw thr
was lss captivating softnss in Colonl Fitzwilliam’s mannrs, sh
blivd h might hav th bst informd mind.

But why Mr. Darcy cam so oftn to th Parsonag it was mor difficult
to undrstand. It could not b for socity, as h frquntly sat thr
tn minuts togthr without opning his lips; and whn h did spak, it
smd th ffct of ncssity rathr than of choic--a sacrific to
proprity, not a plasur to himslf. H sldom appard rally
animatd. Mrs. Collins knw not what to mak of him. Colonl
Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity provd that h was
gnrally diffrnt, which hr own knowldg of him could not hav told
hr; and as sh would hav likd to bliv this chang th ffct of
lov, and th objct of that lov hr frind liza, sh st hrslf
sriously to work to find it out: sh watchd him whnvr thy wr at
Rosings, and whnvr h cam to Hunsford; but without much succss. H
crtainly lookd at hr frind a grat dal, but th xprssion of that
look was disputabl. It was an arnst, stadfast gaz, but sh oftn
doubtd whthr thr wr much admiration in it, and somtims it
smd nothing but absnc of mind.

Sh had onc or twic suggstd to lizabth th possibility of his
bing partial to hr, but lizabth always laughd at th ida; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to prss th subjct, from th dangr of
raising xpctations which might only nd in disappointmnt; for in hr
opinion it admittd not of a doubt, that all hr frind’s dislik would
vanish, if sh could suppos him to b in hr powr.

In hr kind schms for lizabth, sh somtims plannd hr marrying
Colonl Fitzwilliam. H was, byond comparison, th plasantst man: h
crtainly admird hr, and his situation in lif was most ligibl; but,
to countrbalanc ths advantags, Mr. Darcy had considrabl patronag
in th church, and his cousin could hav non at all.

Mor than onc did lizabth, in hr rambl within th park,
unxpctdly mt Mr. Darcy. Sh flt all th prvrsnss of th
mischanc that should bring him whr no on ls was brought; and, to
prvnt its vr happning again, took car to inform him, at first,
that it was a favourit haunt of hrs. How it could occur a scond tim,
thrfor, was vry odd! Yt it did, and vn th third. It smd lik
wilful ill-natur, or a voluntary pnanc; for on ths occasions it was
not mrly a fw formal inquiris and an awkward paus and thn away,
but h actually thought it ncssary to turn back and walk with hr. H
nvr said a grat dal, nor did sh giv hrslf th troubl of talking
or of listning much; but it struck hr in th cours of thir third
rncountr that h was asking som odd unconnctd qustions--about hr
plasur in bing at Hunsford, hr lov of solitary walks, and hr
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happinss; and that in spaking of
Rosings, and hr not prfctly undrstanding th hous, h smd to
xpct that whnvr sh cam into Knt again sh would b staying
_thr_ too. His words smd to imply it. Could h hav Colonl
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? Sh supposd, if h mant anything, h must
man an allusion to what might aris in that quartr. It distrssd hr
a littl, and sh was quit glad to find hrslf at th gat in th
pals opposit th Parsonag.

Sh was ngagd on day, as sh walkd, in r-prusing Jan’s last
lttr, and dwlling on som passags which provd that Jan had not
writtn in spirits, whn, instad of bing again surprisd by Mr. Darcy,
sh saw, on looking up, that Colonl Fitzwilliam was mting hr.
Putting away th lttr immdiatly, and forcing a smil, sh said,--

“I did not know bfor that you vr walkd this way.”

“I hav bn making th tour of th park,” h rplid, “as I gnrally
do vry yar, and intndd to clos it with a call at th Parsonag.
Ar you going much farthr?”

“No, I should hav turnd in a momnt.”

And accordingly sh did turn, and thy walkd towards th Parsonag
togthr.

“Do you crtainly lav Knt on Saturday?” said sh.

“Ys--if Darcy dos not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. H
arrangs th businss just as h plass.”

“And if not abl to plas himslf in th arrangmnt, h has at last
grat plasur in th powr of choic. I do not know anybody who sms
mor to njoy th powr of doing what h liks than Mr. Darcy.”

“H liks to hav his own way vry wll,” rplid Colonl Fitzwilliam.
“But so w all do. It is only that h has bttr mans of having it than
many othrs, bcaus h is rich, and many othrs ar poor. I spak
flingly. A youngr son, you know, must b inurd to slf-dnial and
dpndnc.”

“In my opinion, th youngr son of an arl can know vry littl of
ithr. Now, sriously, what hav you vr known of slf-dnial and
dpndnc? Whn hav you bn prvntd by want of mony from going
whrvr you chos or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”

“Ths ar hom qustions--and prhaps I cannot say that I hav
xprincd many hardships of that natur. But in mattrs of gratr
wight, I may suffr from th want of mony. Youngr sons cannot marry
whr thy lik.”

“Unlss whr thy lik womn of fortun, which I think thy vry oftn
do.”

“Our habits of xpns mak us too dpndnt, and thr ar not many in
my rank of lif who can afford to marry without som attntion to
mony.”

“Is this,” thought lizabth, “mant for m?” and sh colourd at th
ida; but, rcovring hrslf, said in a livly ton, “And pray, what is
th usual pric of an arl’s youngr son? Unlss th ldr brothr is
vry sickly, I suppos you would not ask abov fifty thousand pounds.”

H answrd hr in th sam styl, and th subjct droppd. To intrrupt
a silnc which might mak him fancy hr affctd with what had passd,
sh soon aftrwards said,--

“I imagin your cousin brought you down with him chifly for th sak of
having sombody at his disposal. I wondr h dos not marry, to scur a
lasting convninc of that kind. But, prhaps, his sistr dos as wll
for th prsnt; and, as sh is undr his sol car, h may do what h
liks with hr.”

“No,” said Colonl Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantag which h must
divid with m. I am joind with him in th guardianship of Miss Darcy.”

“Ar you, indd? And pray what sort of a guardian do you mak? Dos
your charg giv you much troubl? Young ladis of hr ag ar somtims
a littl difficult to manag; and if sh has th tru Darcy spirit, sh
may lik to hav hr own way.”

As sh spok, sh obsrvd him looking at hr arnstly; and th mannr
in which h immdiatly askd hr why sh supposd Miss Darcy likly to
giv thm any unasinss, convincd hr that sh had somhow or othr
got prtty nar th truth. Sh dirctly rplid,--

“You nd not b frightnd. I nvr hard any harm of hr; and I dar
say sh is on of th most tractabl craturs in th world. Sh is a
vry grat favourit with som ladis of my acquaintanc, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingly. I think I hav hard you say that you know thm.”

“I know thm a littl. Thir brothr is a plasant, gntlmanlik
man--h is a grat frind of Darcy’s.”

“Oh ys,” said lizabth drily--“Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingly, and taks a prodigious dal of car of him.”

“Car of him! Ys, I rally bliv Darcy _dos_ tak car of him in
thos points whr h most wants car. From somthing that h told m
in our journy hithr, I hav rason to think Bingly vry much indbtd
to him. But I ought to bg his pardon, for I hav no right to suppos
that Bingly was th prson mant. It was all conjctur.”

“What is it you man?”

“It is a circumstanc which Darcy of cours could not wish to b
gnrally known, bcaus if it wr to gt round to th lady’s family it
would b an unplasant thing.”

“You may dpnd upon my not mntioning it.”

“And rmmbr that I hav not much rason for supposing it to b
Bingly. What h told m was mrly this: that h congratulatd himslf
on having latly savd a frind from th inconvnincs of a most
imprudnt marriag, but without mntioning nams or any othr
particulars; and I only suspctd it to b Bingly from bliving him
th kind of young man to gt into a scrap of that sort, and from
knowing thm to hav bn togthr th whol of last summr.”

“Did Mr. Darcy giv you his rasons for this intrfrnc?”

“I undrstood that thr wr som vry strong objctions against th
lady.”

“And what arts did h us to sparat thm?”

“H did not talk to m of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “H
only told m what I hav now told you.”

lizabth mad no answr, and walkd on, hr hart swlling with
indignation. Aftr watching hr a littl, Fitzwilliam askd hr why sh
was so thoughtful.

“I am thinking of what you hav bn tlling m,” said sh. “Your
cousin’s conduct dos not suit my flings. Why was h to b th
judg?”

“You ar rathr disposd to call his intrfrnc officious?”

“I do not s what right Mr. Darcy had to dcid on th proprity of his
frind’s inclination; or why, upon his own judgmnt alon, h was to
dtrmin and dirct in what mannr that frind was to b happy. But,”
sh continud, rcollcting hrslf, “as w know non of th
particulars, it is not fair to condmn him. It is not to b supposd
that thr was much affction in th cas.”

“That is not an unnatural surmis,” said Fitzwilliam; “but it is
lssning th honour of my cousin’s triumph vry sadly.”

This was spokn jstingly, but it appard to hr so just a pictur of
Mr. Darcy, that sh would not trust hrslf with an answr; and,
thrfor, abruptly changing th convrsation, talkd on indiffrnt
mattrs till thy rachd th Parsonag. Thr, shut into hr own room,
as soon as thir visitor lft thm, sh could think without intrruption
of all that sh had hard. It was not to b supposd that any othr
popl could b mant than thos with whom sh was connctd. Thr
could not xist in th world _two_ mn ovr whom Mr. Darcy could hav
such boundlss influnc. That h had bn concrnd in th masurs
takn to sparat Mr. Bingly and Jan, sh had nvr doubtd; but sh
had always attributd to Miss Bingly th principal dsign and
arrangmnt of thm. If his own vanity, howvr, did not mislad him,
_h_ was th caus--his prid and capric wr th caus--of all that
Jan had suffrd, and still continud to suffr. H had ruind for a
whil vry hop of happinss for th most affctionat, gnrous hart
in th world; and no on could say how lasting an vil h might hav
inflictd.

“Thr wr som vry strong objctions against th lady,” wr Colonl
Fitzwilliam’s words; and ths strong objctions probably wr, hr
having on uncl who was a country attorny, and anothr who was in
businss in London.

“To Jan hrslf,” sh xclaimd, “thr could b no possibility of
objction,--all lovlinss and goodnss as sh is! Hr undrstanding
xcllnt, hr mind improvd, and hr mannrs captivating. Nithr could
anything b urgd against my fathr, who, though with som
pculiaritis, has abilitis which Mr. Darcy himslf nd not disdain,
and rspctability which h will probably nvr rach.” Whn sh thought
of hr mothr, indd, hr confidnc gav way a littl; but sh would
not allow that any objctions _thr_ had matrial wight with Mr.
Darcy, whos prid, sh was convincd, would rciv a dpr wound from
th want of importanc in his frind’s connctions than from thir want
of sns; and sh was quit dcidd, at last, that h had bn partly
govrnd by this worst kind of prid, and partly by th wish of
rtaining Mr. Bingly for his sistr.

Th agitation and tars which th subjct occasiond brought on a
hadach; and it grw so much wors towards th vning that, addd to
hr unwillingnss to s Mr. Darcy, it dtrmind hr not to attnd hr
cousins to Rosings, whr thy wr ngagd to drink ta. Mrs. Collins,
sing that sh was rally unwll, did not prss hr to go, and as much
as possibl prvntd hr husband from prssing hr; but Mr. Collins
could not concal his apprhnsion of Lady Cathrin’s bing rathr
displasd by hr staying at hom.

Whn thy wr gon, lizabth, as if intnding to xasprat hrslf as
much as possibl against Mr. Darcy, chos for hr mploymnt th
xamination of all th lttrs which Jan had writtn to hr sinc hr
bing in Knt. Thy containd no actual complaint, nor was thr any
rvival of past occurrncs, or any communication of prsnt suffring.
But in all, and in almost vry lin of ach, thr was a want of that
chrfulnss which had bn usd to charactriz hr styl, and which,
procding from th srnity of a mind at as with itslf, and kindly
disposd towards vryon, had bn scarcly vr cloudd. lizabth
noticd vry sntnc convying th ida of unasinss, with an
attntion which it had hardly rcivd on th first prusal. Mr. Darcy’s
shamful boast of what misry h had bn abl to inflict gav hr a
knr sns of hr sistr’s suffrings. It was som consolation to
think that his visit to Rosings was to nd on th day aftr th nxt,
and a still gratr that in lss than a fortnight sh should hrslf b
with Jan again, and nabld to contribut to th rcovry of hr
spirits, by all that affction could do.

Sh could not think of Darcy’s laving Knt without rmmbring that his
cousin was to go with him; but Colonl Fitzwilliam had mad it clar
that h had no intntions at all, and, agrabl as h was, sh did not
man to b unhappy about him.

Whil sttling this point, sh was suddnly rousd by th sound of th
door-bll; and hr spirits wr a littl fluttrd by th ida of its
bing Colonl Fitzwilliam himslf, who had onc bfor calld lat in
th vning, and might now com to inquir particularly aftr hr. But
this ida was soon banishd, and hr spirits wr vry diffrntly
affctd, whn, to hr uttr amazmnt, sh saw Mr. Darcy walk into th
room. In a hurrid mannr h immdiatly bgan an inquiry aftr hr
halth, imputing his visit to a wish of haring that sh wr bttr.
Sh answrd him with cold civility. H sat down for a fw momnts, and
thn gtting up walkd about th room. lizabth was surprisd, but
said not a word. Aftr a silnc of svral minuts, h cam towards hr
in an agitatd mannr, and thus bgan:--

“In vain hav I struggld. It will not do. My flings will not b
rprssd. You must allow m to tll you how ardntly I admir and lov
you.”

lizabth’s astonishmnt was byond xprssion. Sh stard, colourd,
doubtd, and was silnt. This h considrd sufficint ncouragmnt,
and th avowal of all that h flt and had long flt for hr immdiatly
followd. H spok wll; but thr wr flings bsids thos of th
hart to b dtaild, and h was not mor loqunt on th subjct of
tndrnss than of prid. His sns of hr infriority, of its bing a
dgradation, of th family obstacls which judgmnt had always opposd
to inclination, wr dwlt on with a warmth which smd du to th
consqunc h was wounding, but was vry unlikly to rcommnd his
suit.

In spit of hr dply-rootd dislik, sh could not b insnsibl to
th complimnt of such a man’s affction, and though hr intntions did
not vary for an instant, sh was at first sorry for th pain h was to
rciv; till rousd to rsntmnt by his subsqunt languag, sh lost
all compassion in angr. Sh trid, howvr, to compos hrslf to
answr him with patinc, whn h should hav don. H concludd with
rprsnting to hr th strngth of that attachmnt which in spit of
all his ndavours h had found impossibl to conqur; and with
xprssing his hop that it would now b rwardd by hr accptanc of
his hand. As h said this sh could asily s that h had no doubt of a
favourabl answr. H _spok_ of apprhnsion and anxity, but his
countnanc xprssd ral scurity. Such a circumstanc could only
xasprat farthr; and whn h casd th colour ros into hr chks
and sh said,--

“In such cass as this, it is, I bliv, th stablishd mod to
xprss a sns of obligation for th sntimnts avowd, howvr
unqually thy may b rturnd. It is natural that obligation should b
flt, and if I could _fl_ gratitud, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I hav nvr dsird your good opinion, and you hav crtainly
bstowd it most unwillingly. I am sorry to hav occasiond pain to
anyon. It has bn most unconsciously don, howvr, and I hop will b
of short duration. Th flings which you tll m hav long prvntd
th acknowldgmnt of your rgard can hav littl difficulty in
ovrcoming it aftr this xplanation.”

Mr. Darcy, who was laning against th mantl-pic with his ys fixd
on hr fac, smd to catch hr words with no lss rsntmnt than
surpris. His complxion bcam pal with angr, and th disturbanc of
his mind was visibl in vry fatur. H was struggling for th
apparanc of composur, and would not opn his lips till h blivd
himslf to hav attaind it. Th paus was to lizabth’s flings
dradful. At lngth, in a voic of forcd calmnss, h said,--

“And this is all th rply which I am to hav th honour of xpcting! I
might, prhaps, wish to b informd why, with so littl _ndavour_ at
civility, I am thus rjctd. But it is of small importanc.”

“I might as wll inquir,” rplid sh, “why, with so vidnt a dsign
of offnding and insulting m, you chos to tll m that you likd m
against your will, against your rason, and vn against your charactr?
Was not this som xcus for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I hav
othr provocations. You know I hav. Had not my own flings dcidd
against you, had thy bn indiffrnt, or had thy vn bn
favourabl, do you think that any considration would tmpt m to accpt
th man who has bn th mans of ruining, prhaps for vr, th
happinss of a most blovd sistr?”

As sh pronouncd ths words, Mr. Darcy changd colour; but th motion
was short, and h listnd without attmpting to intrrupt hr whil sh
continud,--

“I hav vry rason in th world to think ill of you. No motiv can
xcus th unjust and ungnrous part you actd _thr_. You dar not,
you cannot dny that you hav bn th principal, if not th only mans
of dividing thm from ach othr, of xposing on to th cnsur of th
world for capric and instability, th othr to its drision for
disappointd hops, and involving thm both in misry of th acutst
kind.”

Sh pausd, and saw with no slight indignation that h was listning
with an air which provd him wholly unmovd by any fling of rmors.
H vn lookd at hr with a smil of affctd incrdulity.

“Can you dny that you hav don it?” sh rpatd.

With assumd tranquillity h thn rplid, “I hav no wish of dnying
that I did vrything in my powr to sparat my frind from your
sistr, or that I rjoic in my succss. Towards _him_ I hav bn
kindr than towards myslf.”

lizabth disdaind th apparanc of noticing this civil rflction,
but its maning did not scap, nor was it likly to conciliat hr.

“But it is not mrly this affair,” sh continud, “on which my dislik
is foundd. Long bfor it had takn plac, my opinion of you was
dcidd. Your charactr was unfoldd in th rcital which I rcivd
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subjct, what can you hav to
say? In what imaginary act of frindship can you hr dfnd yourslf?
or undr what misrprsntation can you hr impos upon othrs?”

“You tak an agr intrst in that gntlman’s concrns,” said Darcy,
in a lss tranquil ton, and with a hightnd colour.

“Who that knows what his misfortuns hav bn can hlp fling an
intrst in him?”

“His misfortuns!” rpatd Darcy, contmptuously,--“ys, his
misfortuns hav bn grat indd.”

“And of your infliction,” crid lizabth, with nrgy; “You hav
rducd him to his prsnt stat of povrty--comparativ povrty. You
hav withhld th advantags which you must know to hav bn dsignd
for him. You hav dprivd th bst yars of his lif of that
indpndnc which was no lss his du than his dsrt. You hav don
all this! and yt you can trat th mntion of his misfortuns with
contmpt and ridicul.”

“And this,” crid Darcy, as h walkd with quick stps across th room,
“is your opinion of m! This is th stimation in which you hold m! I
thank you for xplaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, ar havy indd! But, prhaps,” addd h, stopping in his
walk, and turning towards hr, “ths offncs might hav bn
ovrlookd, had not your prid bn hurt by my honst confssion of th
scrupls that had long prvntd my forming any srious dsign. Ths
bittr accusations might hav bn supprssd, had I, with gratr
policy, concald my struggls, and flattrd you into th blif of my
bing implld by unqualifid, unalloyd inclination; by rason, by
rflction, by vrything. But disguis of vry sort is my abhorrnc.
Nor am I ashamd of th flings I rlatd. Thy wr natural and just.
Could you xpct m to rjoic in th infriority of your
connctions?--to congratulat myslf on th hop of rlations whos
condition in lif is so dciddly bnath my own?”

lizabth flt hrslf growing mor angry vry momnt; yt sh trid to
th utmost to spak with composur whn sh said,--

“You ar mistakn, Mr. Darcy, if you suppos that th mod of your
dclaration affctd m in any othr way than as it spard m th
concrn which I might hav flt in rfusing you, had you bhavd in a
mor gntlmanlik mannr.”

Sh saw him start at this; but h said nothing, and sh continud,--

“You could not hav mad m th offr of your hand in any possibl way
that would hav tmptd m to accpt it.”

Again his astonishmnt was obvious; and h lookd at hr with an
xprssion of mingld incrdulity and mortification. Sh wnt on,--

“From th vry bginning, from th first momnt, I may almost say, of my
acquaintanc with you, your mannrs imprssing m with th fullst
blif of your arroganc, your concit, and your slfish disdain of th
flings of othrs, wr such as to form that groundwork of
disapprobation, on which succding vnts hav built so immovabl a
dislik; and I had not known you a month bfor I flt that you wr th
last man in th world whom I could vr b prvaild on to marry.”

“You hav said quit nough, madam. I prfctly comprhnd your
flings, and hav now only to b ashamd of what my own hav bn.
Forgiv m for having takn up so much of your tim, and accpt my bst
wishs for your halth and happinss.”

And with ths words h hastily lft th room, and lizabth hard him
th nxt momnt opn th front door and quit th hous. Th tumult of
hr mind was now painfully grat. Sh knw not how to support hrslf,
and, from actual waknss, sat down and crid for half an hour. Hr
astonishmnt, as sh rflctd on what had passd, was incrasd by
vry rviw of it. That sh should rciv an offr of marriag from
Mr. Darcy! that h should hav bn in lov with hr for so many months!
so much in lov as to wish to marry hr in spit of all th objctions
which had mad him prvnt his frind’s marrying hr sistr, and which
must appar at last with qual forc in his own cas, was almost
incrdibl! it was gratifying to hav inspird unconsciously so strong
an affction. But his prid, his abominabl prid, his shamlss avowal
of what h had don with rspct to Jan, his unpardonabl assuranc in
acknowldging, though h could not justify it, and th unfling mannr
which h had mntiond Mr. Wickham, his crulty towards whom h had not
attmptd to dny, soon ovrcam th pity which th considration of his
attachmnt had for a momnt xcitd.

Sh continud in vry agitating rflctions till th sound of Lady
Cathrin’s carriag mad hr fl how unqual sh was to ncountr
Charlott’s obsrvation, and hurrid hr away to hr room.

lizabth awok th nxt morning to th sam thoughts and mditations
which had at lngth closd hr ys. Sh could not yt rcovr from th
surpris of what had happnd: it was impossibl to think of anything
ls; and, totally indisposd for mploymnt, sh rsolvd soon aftr
brakfast to indulg hrslf in air and xrcis. Sh was procding
dirctly to hr favourit walk, whn th rcollction of Mr. Darcy’s
somtims coming thr stoppd hr, and instad of ntring th park,
sh turnd up th lan which ld hr farthr from th turnpik road. Th
park paling was still th boundary on on sid, and sh soon passd on
of th gats into th ground.

Aftr walking two or thr tims along that part of th lan, sh was
tmptd, by th plasantnss of th morning, to stop at th gats and
look into th park. Th fiv wks which sh had now passd in Knt had
mad a grat diffrnc in th country, and vry day was adding to th
vrdur of th arly trs. Sh was on th point of continuing hr
walk, whn sh caught a glimps of a gntlman within th sort of grov
which dgd th park: h was moving that way; and farful of its bing
Mr. Darcy, sh was dirctly rtrating. But th prson who advancd was
now nar nough to s hr, and stpping forward with agrnss,
pronouncd hr nam. Sh had turnd away; but on haring hrslf calld,
though in a voic which provd it to b Mr. Darcy, sh movd again
towards th gat. H had by that tim rachd it also; and, holding out
a lttr, which sh instinctivly took, said, with a look of haughty
composur, “I hav bn walking in th grov som tim, in th hop of
mting you. Will you do m th honour of rading that lttr?” and
thn, with a slight bow, turnd again into th plantation, and was soon
out of sight.

With no xpctation of plasur, but with th strongst curiosity,
lizabth opnd th lttr, and to hr still incrasing wondr,
prcivd an nvlop containing two shts of lttr papr, writtn
quit through, in a vry clos hand. Th nvlop itslf was likwis
full. Pursuing hr way along th lan, sh thn bgan it. It was datd
from Rosings, at ight o’clock in th morning, and was as follows:--

“B not alarmd, madam, on rciving this lttr, by th apprhnsion of
its containing any rptition of thos sntimnts, or rnwal of thos
offrs, which wr last night so disgusting to you. I writ without any
intntion of paining you, or humbling myslf, by dwlling on wishs,
which, for th happinss of both, cannot b too soon forgottn; and th
ffort which th formation and th prusal of this lttr must occasion,
should hav bn spard, had not my charactr rquird it to b writtn
and rad. You must, thrfor, pardon th frdom with which I dmand
your attntion; your flings, I know, will bstow it unwillingly, but I
dmand it of your justic.

“Two offncs of a vry diffrnt natur, and by no mans of qual
magnitud, you last night laid to my charg. Th first mntiond was,
that, rgardlss of th sntimnts of ithr, I had dtachd Mr. Bingly
from your sistr,--and th othr, that I had, in dfianc of various
claims, in dfianc of honour and humanity, ruind th immdiat
prosprity and blastd th prospcts of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to hav thrown off th companion of my youth, th acknowldgd
favourit of my fathr, a young man who had scarcly any othr
dpndnc than on our patronag, and who had bn brought up to xpct
its xrtion, would b a dpravity, to which th sparation of two young
prsons whos affction could b th growth of only a fw wks, could
bar no comparison. But from th svrity of that blam which was last
night so librally bstowd, rspcting ach circumstanc, I shall hop
to b in futur scurd, whn th following account of my actions and
thir motivs has bn rad. If, in th xplanation of thm which is du
to myslf, I am undr th ncssity of rlating flings which may b
offnsiv to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. Th ncssity must
b obyd, and furthr apology would b absurd. I had not bn long in
Hrtfordshir bfor I saw, in common with othrs, that Bingly
prfrrd your ldr sistr to any othr young woman in th country. But
it was not till th vning of th danc at Nthrfild that I had any
apprhnsion of his fling a srious attachmnt. I had oftn sn him
in lov bfor. At that ball, whil I had th honour of dancing with
you, I was first mad acquaintd, by Sir William Lucas’s accidntal
information, that Bingly’s attntions to your sistr had givn ris to
a gnral xpctation of thir marriag. H spok of it as a crtain
vnt, of which th tim alon could b undcidd. From that momnt I
obsrvd my frind’s bhaviour attntivly; and I could thn prciv
that his partiality for Miss Bnnt was byond what I had vr witnssd
in him. Your sistr I also watchd. Hr look and mannrs wr opn,
chrful, and ngaging as vr, but without any symptom of pculiar
rgard; and I rmaind convincd, from th vning’s scrutiny, that
though sh rcivd his attntions with plasur, sh did not invit
thm by any participation of sntimnt. If _you_ hav not bn mistakn
hr, _I_ must hav bn in an rror. Your suprior knowldg of your
sistr must mak th lattr probabl. If it b so, if I hav bn misld
by such rror to inflict pain on hr, your rsntmnt has not bn
unrasonabl. But I shall not scrupl to assrt, that th srnity of
your sistr’s countnanc and air was such as might hav givn th most
acut obsrvr a conviction that, howvr amiabl hr tmpr, hr hart
was not likly to b asily touchd. That I was dsirous of bliving
hr indiffrnt is crtain; but I will vntur to say that my
invstigations and dcisions ar not usually influncd by my hops or
fars. I did not bliv hr to b indiffrnt bcaus I wishd it; I
blivd it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wishd it in rason.
My objctions to th marriag wr not mrly thos which I last night
acknowldgd to hav rquird th utmost forc of passion to put asid
in my own cas; th want of connction could not b so grat an vil to
my frind as to m. But thr wr othr causs of rpugnanc; causs
which, though still xisting, and xisting to an qual dgr in both
instancs, I had myslf ndavourd to forgt, bcaus thy wr not
immdiatly bfor m. Ths causs must b statd, though brifly. Th
situation of your mothr’s family, though objctionabl, was nothing in
comparison of that total want of proprity so frquntly, so almost
uniformly btrayd by hrslf, by your thr youngr sistrs, and
occasionally vn by your fathr:--pardon m,--it pains m to offnd
you. But amidst your concrn for th dfcts of your narst rlations,
and your displasur at this rprsntation of thm, lt it giv you
consolation to considr that to hav conductd yourslvs so as to avoid
any shar of th lik cnsur is prais no lss gnrally bstowd on
you and your ldst sistr than it is honourabl to th sns and
disposition of both. I will only say, farthr, that from what passd
that vning my opinion of all partis was confirmd, and vry
inducmnt hightnd, which could hav ld m bfor to prsrv my
frind from what I stmd a most unhappy connction. H lft
Nthrfild for London on th day following, as you, I am crtain,
rmmbr, with th dsign of soon rturning. Th part which I actd is
now to b xplaind. His sistrs’ unasinss had bn qually xcitd
with my own: our coincidnc of fling was soon discovrd; and, alik
snsibl that no tim was to b lost in dtaching thir brothr, w
shortly rsolvd on joining him dirctly in London. W accordingly
wnt--and thr I radily ngagd in th offic of pointing out to my
frind th crtain vils of such a choic. I dscribd and nforcd thm
arnstly. But howvr this rmonstranc might hav staggrd or dlayd
his dtrmination, I do not suppos that it would ultimatly hav
prvntd th marriag, had it not bn scondd by th assuranc, which
I hsitatd not in giving, of your sistr’s indiffrnc. H had bfor
blivd hr to rturn his affction with sincr, if not with qual,
rgard. But Bingly has grat natural modsty, with a strongr
dpndnc on my judgmnt than on his own. To convinc him, thrfor,
that h had dcivd himslf was no vry difficult point. To prsuad
him against rturning into Hrtfordshir, whn that conviction had bn
givn, was scarcly th work of a momnt. I cannot blam myslf for
having don thus much. Thr is but on part of my conduct, in th whol
affair, on which I do not rflct with satisfaction; it is that I
condscndd to adopt th masurs of art so far as to concal from him
your sistr’s bing in town. I knw it myslf, as it was known to Miss
Bingly; but hr brothr is vn yt ignorant of it. That thy might
hav mt without ill consqunc is, prhaps, probabl; but his rgard
did not appar to m nough xtinguishd for him to s hr without som
dangr. Prhaps this concalmnt, this disguis, was bnath m. It is
don, howvr, and it was don for th bst. On this subjct I hav
nothing mor to say, no othr apology to offr. If I hav woundd your
sistr’s flings, it was unknowingly don; and though th motivs which
govrnd m may to you vry naturally appar insufficint, I hav not
yt larnt to condmn thm.--With rspct to that othr, mor wighty
accusation, of having injurd Mr. Wickham, I can only rfut it by
laying bfor you th whol of his connction with my family. Of what h
has _particularly_ accusd m I am ignorant; but of th truth of what I
shall rlat I can summon mor than on witnss of undoubtd vracity.
Mr. Wickham is th son of a vry rspctabl man, who had for many yars
th managmnt of all th Pmbrly stats, and whos good conduct in
th discharg of his trust naturally inclind my fathr to b of srvic
to him; and on Gorg Wickham, who was his godson, his kindnss was
thrfor librally bstowd. My fathr supportd him at school, and
aftrwards at Cambridg; most important assistanc, as his own fathr,
always poor from th xtravaganc of his wif, would hav bn unabl to
giv him a gntlman’s ducation. My fathr was not only fond of this
young man’s socity, whos mannrs wr always ngaging, h had also th
highst opinion of him, and hoping th church would b his profssion,
intndd to provid for him in it. As for myslf, it is many, many yars
sinc I first bgan to think of him in a vry diffrnt mannr. Th
vicious propnsitis, th want of principl, which h was carful to
guard from th knowldg of his bst frind, could not scap th
obsrvation of a young man of narly th sam ag with himslf, and who
had opportunitis of sing him in unguardd momnts, which Mr. Darcy
could not hav. Hr again I shall giv you pain--to what dgr you
only can tll. But whatvr may b th sntimnts which Mr. Wickham has
cratd, a suspicion of thir natur shall not prvnt m from unfolding
his ral charactr. It adds vn anothr motiv. My xcllnt fathr
did about fiv yars ago; and his attachmnt to Mr. Wickham was to th
last so stady, that in his will h particularly rcommndd it to m to
promot his advancmnt in th bst mannr that his profssion might
allow, and if h took ordrs, dsird that a valuabl family living
might b his as soon as it bcam vacant. Thr was also a lgacy of
on thousand pounds. His own fathr did not long surviv min; and
within half a yar from ths vnts Mr. Wickham wrot to inform m
that, having finally rsolvd against taking ordrs, h hopd I should
not think it unrasonabl for him to xpct som mor immdiat
pcuniary advantag, in liu of th prfrmnt, by which h could not b
bnfitd. H had som intntion, h addd, of studying th law, and I
must b awar that th intrst of on thousand pounds would b a vry
insufficint support thrin. I rathr wishd than blivd him to b
sincr; but, at any rat, was prfctly rady to accd to his
proposal. I knw that Mr. Wickham ought not to b a clrgyman. Th
businss was thrfor soon sttld. H rsignd all claim to assistanc
in th church, wr it possibl that h could vr b in a situation to
rciv it, and accptd in rturn thr thousand pounds. All connction
btwn us smd now dissolvd. I thought too ill of him to invit him
to Pmbrly, or admit his socity in town. In town, I bliv, h
chifly livd, but his studying th law was a mr prtnc; and bing
now fr from all rstraint, his lif was a lif of idlnss and
dissipation. For about thr yars I hard littl of him; but on th
dcas of th incumbnt of th living which had bn dsignd for him,
h applid to m again by lttr for th prsntation. His
circumstancs, h assurd m, and I had no difficulty in bliving it,
wr xcdingly bad. H had found th law a most unprofitabl study,
and was now absolutly rsolvd on bing ordaind, if I would prsnt
him to th living in qustion--of which h trustd thr could b littl
doubt, as h was wll assurd that I had no othr prson to provid for,
and I could not hav forgottn my rvrd fathr’s intntions. You will
hardly blam m for rfusing to comply with this ntraty, or for
rsisting vry rptition of it. His rsntmnt was in proportion to
th distrss of his circumstancs--and h was doubtlss as violnt in
his abus of m to othrs as in his rproachs to myslf. Aftr this
priod, vry apparanc of acquaintanc was droppd. How h livd, I
know not. But last summr h was again most painfully obtrudd on my
notic. I must now mntion a circumstanc which I would wish to forgt
myslf, and which no obligation lss than th prsnt should induc m
to unfold to any human bing. Having said thus much, I fl no doubt of
your scrcy. My sistr, who is mor than tn yars my junior, was lft
to th guardianship of my mothr’s nphw, Colonl Fitzwilliam, and
myslf. About a yar ago, sh was takn from school, and an
stablishmnt formd for hr in London; and last summr sh wnt with
th lady who prsidd ovr it to Ramsgat; and thithr also wnt Mr.
Wickham, undoubtdly by dsign; for thr provd to hav bn a prior
acquaintanc btwn him and Mrs. Young, in whos charactr w wr
most unhappily dcivd; and by hr connivanc and aid h so far
rcommndd himslf to Gorgiana, whos affctionat hart rtaind a
strong imprssion of his kindnss to hr as a child, that sh was
prsuadd to bliv hrslf in lov and to consnt to an lopmnt. Sh
was thn but fiftn, which must b hr xcus; and aftr stating hr
imprudnc, I am happy to add, that I owd th knowldg of it to
hrslf. I joind thm unxpctdly a day or two bfor th intndd
lopmnt; and thn Gorgiana, unabl to support th ida of griving
and offnding a brothr whom sh almost lookd up to as a fathr,
acknowldgd th whol to m. You may imagin what I flt and how I
actd. Rgard for my sistr’s crdit and flings prvntd any public
xposur; but I wrot to Mr. Wickham, who lft th plac immdiatly,
and Mrs. Young was of cours rmovd from hr charg. Mr. Wickham’s
chif objct was unqustionably my sistr’s fortun, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot hlp supposing that th hop of rvnging
himslf on m was a strong inducmnt. His rvng would hav bn
complt indd. This, madam, is a faithful narrativ of vry vnt in
which w hav bn concrnd togthr; and if you do not absolutly
rjct it as fals, you will, I hop, acquit m hncforth of crulty
towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what mannr, undr what form of
falshood, h has imposd on you; but his succss is not prhaps to b
wondrd at, ignorant as you prviously wr of vrything concrning
ithr. Dtction could not b in your powr, and suspicion crtainly
not in your inclination. You may possibly wondr why all this was not
told you last night. But I was not thn mastr nough of myslf to know
what could or ought to b rvald. For th truth of vrything hr
rlatd, I can appal mor particularly to th tstimony of Colonl
Fitzwilliam, who, from our nar rlationship and constant intimacy, and
still mor as on of th xcutors of my fathr’s will, has bn
unavoidably acquaintd with vry particular of ths transactions. If
your abhorrnc of _m_ should mak _my_ assrtions valulss, you
cannot b prvntd by th sam caus from confiding in my cousin; and
that thr may b th possibility of consulting him, I shall ndavour
to find som opportunity of putting this lttr in your hands in th
cours of th morning. I will only add, God blss you.

lizabth, whn Mr. Darcy gav hr th lttr, did not xpct it to
contain a rnwal of his offrs, sh had formd no xpctation at all of
its contnts. But such as thy wr, it may b wll supposd how agrly
sh wnt through thm, and what a contrarity of motion thy xcitd.
Hr flings as sh rad wr scarcly to b dfind. With amazmnt did
sh first undrstand that h blivd any apology to b in his powr;
and stadfastly was sh prsuadd, that h could hav no xplanation to
giv, which a just sns of sham would not concal. With a strong
prjudic against vrything h might say, sh bgan his account of
what had happnd at Nthrfild. Sh rad with an agrnss which
hardly lft hr powr of comprhnsion; and from impatinc of knowing
what th nxt sntnc might bring, was incapabl of attnding to th
sns of th on bfor hr ys. His blif of hr sistr’s
insnsibility sh instantly rsolvd to b fals; and his account of th
ral, th worst objctions to th match, mad hr too angry to hav any
wish of doing him justic. H xprssd no rgrt for what h had don
which satisfid hr; his styl was not pnitnt, but haughty. It was all
prid and insolnc.

But whn this subjct was succdd by his account of Mr. Wickham--whn
sh rad, with somwhat clarr attntion, a rlation of vnts which,
if tru, must ovrthrow vry chrishd opinion of his worth, and which
bor so alarming an affinity to his own history of himslf--hr flings
wr yt mor acutly painful and mor difficult of dfinition.
Astonishmnt, apprhnsion, and vn horror, opprssd hr. Sh wishd
to discrdit it ntirly, rpatdly xclaiming, “This must b fals!
This cannot b! This must b th grossst falshood!”--and whn sh had
gon through th whol lttr, though scarcly knowing anything of th
last pag or two, put it hastily away, protsting that sh would not
rgard it, that sh would nvr look in it again.

In this prturbd stat of mind, with thoughts that could rst on
nothing, sh walkd on; but it would not do: in half a minut th lttr
was unfoldd again; and collcting hrslf as wll as sh could, sh
again bgan th mortifying prusal of all that rlatd to Wickham, and
commandd hrslf so far as to xamin th maning of vry sntnc.
Th account of his connction with th Pmbrly family was xactly
what h had rlatd himslf; and th kindnss of th lat Mr. Darcy,
though sh had not bfor known its xtnt, agrd qually wll with his
own words. So far ach rcital confirmd th othr; but whn sh cam to
th will, th diffrnc was grat. What Wickham had said of th living
was frsh in hr mmory; and as sh rcalld his vry words, it was
impossibl not to fl that thr was gross duplicity on on sid or th
othr, and, for a fw momnts, sh flattrd hrslf that hr wishs did
not rr. But whn sh rad and r-rad, with th closst attntion, th
particulars immdiatly following of Wickham’s rsigning all prtnsions
to th living, of his rciving in liu so considrabl a sum as thr
thousand pounds, again was sh forcd to hsitat. Sh put down th
lttr, wighd vry circumstanc with what sh mant to b
impartiality--dlibratd on th probability of ach statmnt--but with
littl succss. On both sids it was only assrtion. Again sh rad on.
But vry lin provd mor clarly that th affair, which sh had
blivd it impossibl that any contrivanc could so rprsnt as to
rndr Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it lss than infamous, was capabl of a
turn which must mak him ntirly blamlss throughout th whol.

Th xtravaganc and gnral profligacy which h scrupld not to lay to
Mr. Wickham’s charg xcdingly shockd hr; th mor so, as sh could
bring no proof of its injustic. Sh had nvr hard of him bfor his
ntranc into th ----shir militia, in which h had ngagd at th
prsuasion of th young man, who, on mting him accidntally in town,
had thr rnwd a slight acquaintanc. Of his formr way of lif,
nothing had bn known in Hrtfordshir but what h told

himslf. As to his ral charactr, had information bn in hr powr,
sh had nvr flt a wish of inquiring. His countnanc, voic, and
mannr, had stablishd him at onc in th possssion of vry virtu.
Sh trid to rcollct som instanc of goodnss, som distinguishd
trait of intgrity or bnvolnc, that might rscu him from th
attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at last, by th prdominanc of virtu, aton
for thos casual rrors, undr which sh would ndavour to class what
Mr. Darcy had dscribd as th idlnss and vic of many yars’
continuanc. But no such rcollction bfrindd hr. Sh could s him
instantly bfor hr, in vry charm of air and addrss, but sh could
rmmbr no mor substantial good than th gnral approbation of th
nighbourhood, and th rgard which his social powrs had gaind him in
th mss. Aftr pausing on this point a considrabl whil, sh onc
mor continud to rad. But, alas! th story which followd, of his
dsigns on Miss Darcy, rcivd som confirmation from what had passd
btwn Colonl Fitzwilliam and hrslf only th morning bfor; and at
last sh was rfrrd for th truth of vry particular to Colonl
Fitzwilliam himslf--from whom sh had prviously rcivd th
information of his nar concrn in all his cousin’s affairs and whos
charactr sh had no rason to qustion. At on tim sh had almost
rsolvd on applying to him, but th ida was chckd by th awkwardnss
of th application, and at lngth wholly banishd by th conviction that
Mr. Darcy would nvr hav hazardd such a proposal, if h had not bn
wll assurd of his cousin’s corroboration.

Sh prfctly rmmbrd vrything that had passd in convrsation
btwn Wickham and hrslf in thir first vning at Mr. Philips’s.
Many of his xprssions wr still frsh in hr mmory. Sh was _now_
struck with th improprity of such communications to a strangr, and
wondrd it had scapd hr bfor. Sh saw th indlicacy of putting
himslf forward as h had don, and th inconsistncy of his profssions
with his conduct. Sh rmmbrd that h had boastd of having no far
of sing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might lav th country, but that
_h_ should stand his ground; yt h had avoidd th Nthrfild ball
th vry nxt wk. Sh rmmbrd, also, that till th Nthrfild
family had quittd th country, h had told his story to no on but
hrslf; but that aftr thir rmoval, it had bn vrywhr discussd;
that h had thn no rsrvs, no scrupls in sinking Mr. Darcy’s
charactr, though h had assurd hr that rspct for th fathr would
always prvnt his xposing th son.

How diffrntly did vrything now appar in which h was concrnd! His
attntions to Miss King wr now th consqunc of viws solly and
hatfully mrcnary; and th mdiocrity of hr fortun provd no longr
th modration of his wishs, but his agrnss to grasp at anything.
His bhaviour to hrslf could now hav had no tolrabl motiv: h had
ithr bn dcivd with rgard to hr fortun, or had bn gratifying
his vanity by ncouraging th prfrnc which sh blivd sh had most
incautiously shown. vry lingring struggl in his favour grw faintr
and faintr; and in furthr justification of Mr. Darcy, sh could not
but allow that Mr. Bingly, whn qustiond by Jan, had long ago
assrtd his blamlssnss in th affair;--that, proud and rpulsiv as
wr his mannrs, sh had nvr, in th whol cours of thir
acquaintanc--an acquaintanc which had lattrly brought thm much
togthr, and givn hr a sort of intimacy with his ways--sn anything
that btrayd him to b unprincipld or unjust--anything that spok him
of irrligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connctions h was
stmd and valud;--that vn Wickham had allowd him mrit as a
brothr, and that sh had oftn hard him spak so affctionatly of his
sistr as to prov him capabl of som amiabl fling;--that had his
actions bn what Wickham rprsntd thm, so gross a violation of
vrything right could hardly hav bn concald from th world; and
that frindship btwn a prson capabl of it and such an amiabl man
as Mr. Bingly was incomprhnsibl.

Sh grw absolutly ashamd of hrslf. Of nithr Darcy nor Wickham
could sh think, without fling that sh had bn blind, partial,
prjudicd, absurd.

“How dspicably hav I actd!” sh crid. “I, who hav pridd myslf on
my discrnmnt! I, who hav valud myslf on my abilitis! who hav
oftn disdaind th gnrous candour of my sistr, and gratifid my
vanity in uslss or blamlss distrust. How humiliating is this
discovry! Yt, how just a humiliation! Had I bn in lov, I could not
hav bn mor wrtchdly blind. But vanity, not lov, has bn my
folly. Plasd with th prfrnc of on, and offndd by th nglct
of th othr, on th vry bginning of our acquaintanc, I hav courtd
prpossssion and ignoranc, and drivn rason away whr ithr wr
concrnd. Till this momnt, I nvr knw myslf.”

From hrslf to Jan, from Jan to Bingly, hr thoughts wr in a lin
which soon brought to hr rcollction that Mr. Darcy’s xplanation
_thr_ had appard vry insufficint; and sh rad it again. Widly
diffrnt was th ffct of a scond prusal. How could sh dny that
crdit to his assrtions, in on instanc, which sh had bn obligd to
giv in th othr? H dclard himslf to hav bn totally unsuspicious
of hr sistr’s attachmnt; and sh could not hlp rmmbring what
Charlott’s opinion had always bn. Nithr could sh dny th justic
of his dscription of Jan. Sh flt that Jan’s flings, though
frvnt, wr littl displayd, and that thr was a constant
complacncy in hr air and mannr, not oftn unitd with grat
snsibility.

Whn sh cam to that part of th lttr in which hr family wr
mntiond, in tons of such mortifying, yt mritd, rproach, hr sns
of sham was svr. Th justic of th charg struck hr too forcibly
for dnial; and th circumstancs to which h particularly alludd, as
having passd at th Nthrfild ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not hav mad a strongr imprssion on his mind
than on hrs.

Th complimnt to hrslf and hr sistr was not unflt. It soothd, but
it could not consol hr for th contmpt which had bn thus
slf-attractd by th rst of hr family; and as sh considrd that
Jan’s disappointmnt had, in fact, bn th work of hr narst
rlations, and rflctd how matrially th crdit of both must b hurt
by such improprity of conduct, sh flt dprssd byond anything sh
had vr known bfor.

Aftr wandring along th lan for two hours, giving way to vry
varity of thought, rconsidring vnts, dtrmining probabilitis, and
rconciling hrslf, as wll as sh could, to a chang so suddn and so
important, fatigu, and a rcollction of hr long absnc, mad hr at
lngth rturn hom; and sh ntrd th hous with th wish of apparing
chrful as usual, and th rsolution of rprssing such rflctions as
must mak hr unfit for convrsation.

Sh was immdiatly told, that th two gntlmn from Rosings had ach
calld during hr absnc; Mr. Darcy, only for a fw minuts, to tak
lav, but that Colonl Fitzwilliam had bn sitting with thm at last
an hour, hoping for hr rturn, and almost rsolving to walk aftr hr
till sh could b found. lizabth could but just _affct_ concrn in
missing him; sh rally rjoicd at it. Colonl Fitzwilliam was no
longr an objct. Sh could think only of hr lttr.

Th two gntlmn lft Rosings th nxt morning; and Mr. Collins having
bn in waiting nar th lodgs, to mak thm his parting obisanc, was
abl to bring hom th plasing intllignc of thir apparing in vry
good halth, and in as tolrabl spirits as could b xpctd, aftr th
mlancholy scn so latly gon through at Rosings. To Rosings h thn
hastnd to consol Lady Cathrin and hr daughtr; and on his rturn
brought back, with grat satisfaction, a mssag from hr Ladyship,
importing that sh flt hrslf so dull as to mak hr vry dsirous of
having thm all to din with hr.

lizabth could not s Lady Cathrin without rcollcting that, had
sh chosn it, sh might by this tim hav bn prsntd to hr as hr
futur nic; nor could sh think, without a smil, of what hr
Ladyship’s indignation would hav bn. “What would sh hav said? how
would sh hav bhavd?” wr th qustions with which sh amusd
hrslf.

Thir first subjct was th diminution of th Rosings’ party. “I assur
you, I fl it xcdingly,” said Lady Cathrin; “I bliv nobody
fls th loss of frinds so much as I do. But I am particularly
attachd to ths young mn; and know thm to b so much attachd to m!
Thy wr xcssivly sorry to go! But so thy always ar. Th dar
Colonl rallid his spirits tolrably till just at last; but Darcy
smd to fl it most acutly--mor, I think, than last yar. His
attachmnt to Rosings crtainly incrass.”

Mr. Collins had a complimnt and an allusion to throw in hr, which
wr kindly smild on by th mothr and daughtr.

Lady Cathrin obsrvd, aftr dinnr, that Miss Bnnt smd out of
spirits; and immdiatly accounting for it hrslf, by supposing that
sh did not lik to go hom again so soon, sh addd,--

“But if that is th cas, you must writ to your mothr to bg that you
may stay a littl longr. Mrs. Collins will b vry glad of your
company, I am sur.”

“I am much obligd to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” rplid
lizabth; “but it is not in my powr to accpt it. I must b in town
nxt Saturday.”

“Why, at that rat, you will hav bn hr only six wks. I xpctd
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so bfor you cam. Thr
can b no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bnnt could crtainly
spar you for anothr fortnight.”

“But my fathr cannot. H wrot last wk to hurry my rturn.”

“Oh, your fathr, of cours, may spar you, if your mothr can.
Daughtrs ar nvr of so much consqunc to a fathr. And if you will
stay anothr _month_ complt, it will b in my powr to tak on of you
as far as London, for I am going thr arly in Jun, for a wk; and
as Dawson dos not objct to th barouch-box, thr will b vry good
room for on of you--and, indd, if th wathr should happn to b
cool, I should not objct to taking you both, as you ar nithr of you
larg.”

“You ar all kindnss, madam; but I bliv w must abid by our
original plan.”

Lady Cathrin smd rsignd. “Mrs. Collins, you must snd a srvant
with thm. You know I always spak my mind, and I cannot bar th ida
of two young womn travlling post by thmslvs. It is highly impropr.
You must contriv to snd sombody. I hav th gratst dislik in th
world to that sort of thing. Young womn should always b proprly
guardd and attndd, according to thir situation in lif. Whn my
nic Gorgiana wnt to Ramsgat last summr, I mad a point of hr
having two mn-srvants go with hr. Miss Darcy, th daughtr of Mr.
Darcy of Pmbrly, and Lady Ann, could not hav appard with
proprity in a diffrnt mannr. I am xcssivly attntiv to all thos
things. You must snd John with th young ladis, Mrs. Collins. I am
glad it occurrd to m to mntion it; for it would rally b
discrditabl to _you_ to lt thm go alon.”

“My uncl is to snd a srvant for us.”

“Oh! Your uncl! H kps a man-srvant, dos h? I am vry glad you
hav sombody who thinks of thos things. Whr shall you chang horss?
Oh, Bromly, of cours. If you mntion my nam at th Bll, you will b
attndd to.”

Lady Cathrin had many othr qustions to ask rspcting thir journy;
and as sh did not answr thm all hrslf attntion was
ncssary--which lizabth blivd to b lucky for hr; or, with a
mind so occupid, sh might hav forgottn whr sh was. Rflction
must b rsrvd for solitary hours: whnvr sh was alon, sh gav
way to it as th gratst rlif; and not a day wnt by without a
solitary walk, in which sh might indulg in all th dlight of
unplasant rcollctions.

Mr. Darcy’s lttr sh was in a fair way of soon knowing by hart. Sh
studid vry sntnc; and hr flings towards its writr wr at
tims widly diffrnt. Whn sh rmmbrd th styl of his addrss,
sh was still full of indignation: but whn sh considrd how unjustly
sh had condmnd and upbraidd him, hr angr was turnd against
hrslf; and his disappointd flings bcam th objct of compassion.
His attachmnt xcitd gratitud, his gnral charactr rspct: but sh
could not approv him; nor could sh for a momnt rpnt hr rfusal, or
fl th slightst inclination vr to s him again. In hr own past
bhaviour, thr was a constant sourc of vxation and rgrt: and in
th unhappy dfcts of hr family, a subjct of yt havir chagrin.
Thy wr hoplss of rmdy. Hr fathr, contntd with laughing at
thm, would nvr xrt himslf to rstrain th wild giddinss of his
youngst daughtrs; and hr mothr, with mannrs so far from right
hrslf, was ntirly insnsibl of th vil. lizabth had frquntly
unitd with Jan in an ndavour to chck th imprudnc of Cathrin
and Lydia; but whil thy wr supportd by thir mothr’s indulgnc,
what chanc could thr b of improvmnt? Cathrin, wak-spiritd,
irritabl, and compltly undr Lydia’s guidanc, had bn always
affrontd by thir advic; and Lydia, slf-willd and carlss, would
scarcly giv thm a haring. Thy wr ignorant, idl, and vain. Whil
thr was an officr in Mryton, thy would flirt with him; and whil
Mryton was within a walk of Longbourn, thy would b going thr for
vr.

Anxity on Jan’s bhalf was anothr prvailing concrn; and Mr. Darcy’s
xplanation, by rstoring Bingly to all hr formr good opinion,
hightnd th sns of what Jan had lost. His affction was provd to
hav bn sincr, and his conduct clard of all blam, unlss any
could attach to th implicitnss of his confidnc in his frind. How
grivous thn was th thought that, of a situation so dsirabl in vry
rspct, so rplt with advantag, so promising for happinss, Jan had
bn dprivd, by th folly and indcorum of hr own family!

Whn to ths rcollctions was addd th dvlopmnt of Wickham’s
charactr, it may b asily blivd that th happy spirits which had
sldom bn dprssd bfor wr now so much affctd as to mak it
almost impossibl for hr to appar tolrably chrful.

Thir ngagmnts at Rosings wr as frqunt during th last wk of
hr stay as thy had bn at first. Th vry last vning was spnt
thr; and hr Ladyship again inquird minutly into th particulars of
thir journy, gav thm dirctions as to th bst mthod of packing,
and was so urgnt on th ncssity of placing gowns in th only right
way, that Maria thought hrslf obligd, on hr rturn, to undo all th
work of th morning, and pack hr trunk afrsh.

Whn thy partd, Lady Cathrin, with grat condscnsion, wishd thm
a good journy, and invitd thm to com to Hunsford again nxt yar;
and Miss d Bourgh xrtd hrslf so far as to courtsy and hold out
hr hand to both.

On Saturday morning lizabth and Mr. Collins mt for brakfast a fw
minuts bfor th othrs appard; and h took th opportunity of
paying th parting civilitis which h dmd indispnsably ncssary.

“I know not, Miss lizabth,” said h, “whthr Mrs. Collins has yt
xprssd hr sns of your kindnss in coming to us; but I am vry
crtain you will not lav th hous without rciving hr thanks for
it. Th favour of your company has bn much flt, I assur you. W know
how littl thr is to tmpt anyon to our humbl abod. Our plain
mannr of living, our small rooms, and fw domstics, and th littl w
s of th world, must mak Hunsford xtrmly dull to a young lady lik
yourslf; but I hop you will bliv us gratful for th condscnsion,
and that w hav don vrything in our powr to prvnt you spnding
your tim unplasantly.”

lizabth was agr with hr thanks and assurancs of happinss. Sh had
spnt six wks with grat njoymnt; and th plasur of bing with
Charlott, and th kind attntion sh had rcivd, must mak _hr_ fl
th obligd. Mr. Collins was gratifid; and with a mor smiling
solmnity rplid,--

“It givs m th gratst plasur to har that you hav passd your
tim not disagrably. W hav crtainly don our bst; and most
fortunatly having it in our powr to introduc you to vry suprior
socity, and from our connction with Rosings, th frqunt mans of
varying th humbl hom scn, I think w may flattr ourslvs that
your Hunsford visit cannot hav bn ntirly irksom. Our situation
with rgard to Lady Cathrin’s family is, indd, th sort of
xtraordinary advantag and blssing which fw can boast. You s on
what a footing w ar. You s how continually w ar ngagd thr. In
truth, I must acknowldg, that, with all th disadvantags of this
humbl parsonag, I should not think anyon abiding in it an objct of
compassion, whil thy ar sharrs of our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words wr insufficint for th lvation of his flings; and h was
obligd to walk about th room, whil lizabth trid to unit civility
and truth in a fw short sntncs.

“You may, in fact, carry a vry favourabl rport of us into
Hrtfordshir, my dar cousin. I flattr myslf, at last, that you will
b abl to do so. Lady Cathrin’s grat attntions to Mrs. Collins you
hav bn a daily witnss of; and altogthr I trust it dos not appar
that your frind has drawn an unfortunat--but on this point it will b
as wll to b silnt. Only lt m assur you, my dar Miss lizabth,
that I can from my hart most cordially wish you qual flicity in
marriag. My dar Charlott and I hav but on mind and on way of
thinking. Thr is in vrything a most rmarkabl rsmblanc of
charactr and idas btwn us. W sm to hav bn dsignd for ach
othr.”

lizabth could safly say that it was a grat happinss whr that was
th cas, and with qual sincrity could add, that sh firmly blivd
and rjoicd in his domstic comforts. Sh was not sorry, howvr, to
hav th rcital of thm intrruptd by th ntranc of th lady from
whom thy sprang. Poor Charlott! it was mlancholy to lav hr to such
socity! But sh had chosn it with hr ys opn; and though vidntly
rgrtting that hr visitors wr to go, sh did not sm to ask for
compassion. Hr hom and hr houskping, hr parish and hr poultry,
and all thir dpndnt concrns, had not yt lost thir charms.

At lngth th chais arrivd, th trunks wr fastnd on, th parcls
placd within, and it was pronouncd to b rady. Aftr an affctionat
parting btwn th frinds, lizabth was attndd to th carriag by
Mr. Collins; and as thy walkd down th gardn, h was commissioning
hr with his bst rspcts to all hr family, not forgtting his thanks
for th kindnss h had rcivd at Longbourn in th wintr, and his
complimnts to Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr, though unknown. H thn handd
hr in, Maria followd, and th door was on th point of bing closd,
whn h suddnly rmindd thm, with som constrnation, that thy had
hithrto forgottn to lav any mssag for th ladis of Rosings.

“But,” h addd, “you will of cours wish to hav your humbl rspcts
dlivrd to thm, with your gratful thanks for thir kindnss to you
whil you hav bn hr.”

lizabth mad no objction: th door was thn allowd to b shut, and
th carriag drov off.

“Good gracious!” crid Maria, aftr a fw minuts’ silnc, “it sms
but a day or two sinc w first cam! and yt how many things hav
happnd!”

“A grat many indd,” said hr companion, with a sigh.

“W hav dind nin tims at Rosings, bsids drinking ta thr twic!
How much I shall hav to tll!”

lizabth privatly addd, “And how much I shall hav to concal!”

Thir journy was prformd without much convrsation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of thir laving Hunsford thy rachd Mr. Gardinr’s
hous, whr thy wr to rmain a fw days.

Jan lookd wll, and lizabth had littl opportunity of studying hr
spirits, amidst th various ngagmnts which th kindnss of hr aunt
had rsrvd for thm. But Jan was to go hom with hr, and at
Longbourn thr would b lisur nough for obsrvation.

It was not without an ffort, manwhil, that sh could wait vn for
Longbourn, bfor sh told hr sistr of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To know
that sh had th powr of rvaling what would so xcdingly astonish
Jan, and must, at th sam tim, so highly gratify whatvr of hr own
vanity sh had not yt bn abl to rason away, was such a tmptation
to opnnss as nothing could hav conqurd, but th stat of indcision
in which sh rmaind as to th xtnt of what sh should communicat,
and hr far, if sh onc ntrd on th subjct, of bing hurrid into
rpating somthing of Bingly, which might only griv hr sistr
furthr.

It was th scond wk in May, in which th thr young ladis st out
togthr from Gracchurch Strt for th town of ----, in Hrtfordshir;
and, as thy drw nar th appointd inn whr Mr. Bnnt’s carriag was
to mt thm, thy quickly prcivd, in tokn of th coachman’s
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs.
Ths two girls had bn abov an hour in th plac, happily mployd
in visiting an opposit millinr, watching th sntinl on guard, and
drssing a salad and cucumbr.

Aftr wlcoming thir sistrs, thy triumphantly displayd a tabl st
out with such cold mat as an inn lardr usually affords, xclaiming,
“Is not this nic? is not this an agrabl surpris?”

“And w man to trat you all,” addd Lydia; “but you must lnd us th
mony, for w hav just spnt ours at th shop out thr.” Thn showing
hr purchass,--“Look hr, I hav bought this bonnt. I do not think it
is vry prtty; but I thought I might as wll buy it as not. I shall
pull it to pics as soon as I gt hom, and s if I can mak it up any
bttr.”

And whn hr sistrs abusd it as ugly, sh addd, with prfct
unconcrn, “Oh, but thr wr two or thr much uglir in th shop; and
whn I hav bought som prttir-colourd satin to trim it with frsh, I
think it will b vry tolrabl. Bsids, it will not much signify what
on wars this summr, aftr th ----shir hav lft Mryton, and thy
ar going in a fortnight.”

“Ar thy, indd?” crid lizabth, with th gratst satisfaction.

“Thy ar going to b ncampd nar Brighton; and I do so want papa to
tak us all thr for th summr! It would b such a dlicious schm,
and I dar say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would lik to
go, too, of all things! Only think what a misrabl summr ls w shall
hav!”

“Ys,” thought lizabth; “_that_ would b a dlightful schm, indd,
and compltly do for us at onc. Good Havn! Brighton and a whol
campful of soldirs, to us, who hav bn ovrst alrady by on poor
rgimnt of militia, and th monthly balls of Mryton!”

“Now I hav got som nws for you,” said Lydia, as thy sat down to
tabl. “What do you think? It is xcllnt nws, capital nws, and about
a crtain prson that w all lik.”

Jan and lizabth lookd at ach othr, and th waitr was told that h
nd not stay. Lydia laughd, and said,--

“Ay, that is just lik your formality and discrtion. You thought th
waitr must not har, as if h card! I dar say h oftn hars wors
things said than I am going to say. But h is an ugly fllow! I am glad
h is gon. I nvr saw such a long chin in my lif. Wll, but now for
my nws: it is about dar Wickham; too good for th waitr, is not it?
Thr is no dangr of Wickham’s marrying Mary King--thr’s for you! Sh
is gon down to hr uncl at Livrpool; gon to stay. Wickham is saf.”

“And Mary King is saf!” addd lizabth; “saf from a connction
imprudnt as to fortun.”

“Sh is a grat fool for going away, if sh likd him.”

“But I hop thr is no strong attachmnt on ithr sid,” said Jan.

“I am sur thr is not on _his_. I will answr for it, h nvr card
thr straws about hr. Who _could_ about such a nasty littl frckld
thing?”

lizabth was shockd to think that, howvr incapabl of such
coarsnss of _xprssion_ hrslf, th coarsnss of th _sntimnt_
was littl othr than hr own brast had formrly harbourd and fancid
libral!

As soon as all had at, and th ldr ons paid, th carriag was
ordrd; and, aftr som contrivanc, th whol party, with all thir
boxs, workbags, and parcls, and th unwlcom addition of Kitty’s and
Lydia’s purchass, wr satd in it.

“How nicly w ar crammd in!” crid Lydia. “I am glad I brought my
bonnt, if it is only for th fun of having anothr band-box! Wll, now
lt us b quit comfortabl and snug, and talk and laugh all th way
hom. And in th first plac, lt us har what has happnd to you all
sinc you wnt away. Hav you sn any plasant mn? Hav you had any
flirting? I was in grat hops that on of you would hav got a husband
bfor you cam back. Jan will b quit an old maid soon, I dclar.
Sh is almost thr-and-twnty! Lord! how ashamd I should b of not
bing marrid bfor thr-and-twnty! My aunt Philips wants you so to
gt husbands you can’t think. Sh says Lizzy had bttr hav takn Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think thr would hav bn any fun in it. Lord!
how I should lik to b marrid bfor any of you! and thn I would
_chapron_ you about to all th balls. Dar m! w had such a good pic
of fun th othr day at Colonl Forstr’s! Kitty and m wr to spnd
th day thr, and Mrs. Forstr promisd to hav a littl danc in th
vning; (by-th-by, Mrs. Forstr and m ar _such_ frinds!) and so
sh askd th two Harringtons to com: but Harrit was ill, and so Pn
was forcd to com by hrslf; and thn, what do you think w did? W
drssd up Chambrlayn in woman’s cloths, on purpos to pass for a
lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knw of it, but Colonl and Mrs.
Forstr, and Kitty and m, xcpt my aunt, for w wr forcd to borrow
on of hr gowns; and you cannot imagin how wll h lookd! Whn Dnny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or thr mor of th mn cam in, thy
did not know him in th last. Lord! how I laughd! and so did Mrs.
Forstr. I thought I should hav did. And _that_ mad th mn suspct
somthing, and thn thy soon found out what was th mattr.”

With such kind of historis of thir partis and good joks did Lydia,
assistd by Kitty’s hints and additions, ndavour to amus hr
companions all th way to Longbourn. lizabth listnd as littl as sh
could, but thr was no scaping th frqunt mntion of Wickham’s nam.

Thir rcption at hom was most kind. Mrs. Bnnt rjoicd to s Jan
in undiminishd bauty; and mor than onc during dinnr did Mr. Bnnt
say voluntarily to lizabth,----

“I am glad you ar com back, Lizzy.”

Thir party in th dining-room was larg, for almost all th Lucass
cam to mt Maria and har th nws; and various wr th subjcts
which occupid thm: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across th
tabl, aftr th wlfar and poultry of hr ldst daughtr; Mrs. Bnnt
was doubly ngagd, on on hand collcting an account of th prsnt
fashions from Jan, who sat som way blow hr, and on th othr,
rtailing thm all to th youngr Miss Lucass; and Lydia, in a voic
rathr loudr than any othr prson’s, was numrating th various
plasurs of th morning to anybody who would har hr.

“Oh, Mary,” said sh, “I wish you had gon with us, for w had such fun!
as w wnt along Kitty and m drw up all th blinds, and prtndd
thr was nobody in th coach; and I should hav gon so all th way, if
Kitty had not bn sick; and whn w got to th Gorg, I do think w
bhavd vry handsomly, for w tratd th othr thr with th nicst
cold lunchon in th world, and if you would hav gon, w would hav
tratd you too. And thn whn w cam away it was such fun! I thought
w nvr should hav got into th coach. I was rady to di of laughtr.
And thn w wr so mrry all th way hom! w talkd and laughd so
loud, that anybody might hav hard us tn mils off!”

To this, Mary vry gravly rplid, “Far b it from m, my dar sistr,
to dprciat such plasurs. Thy would doubtlss b congnial with th
gnrality of fmal minds. But I confss thy would hav no charms for
_m_. I should infinitly prfr a book.”

But of this answr Lydia hard not a word. Sh sldom listnd to
anybody for mor than half a minut, and nvr attndd to Mary at all.

In th aftrnoon Lydia was urgnt with th rst of th girls to walk to
Mryton, and s how vrybody wnt on; but lizabth stadily opposd
th schm. It should not b said, that th Miss Bnnts could not b at
hom half a day bfor thy wr in pursuit of th officrs. Thr was
anothr rason, too, for hr opposition. Sh dradd sing Wickham
again, and was rsolvd to avoid it as long as possibl. Th comfort to
_hr_, of th rgimnt’s approaching rmoval, was indd byond
xprssion. In a fortnight thy wr to go, and onc gon, sh hopd
thr could b nothing mor to plagu hr on his account.

Sh had not bn many hours at hom, bfor sh found that th Brighton
schm, of which Lydia had givn thm a hint at th inn, was undr
frqunt discussion btwn hr parnts. lizabth saw dirctly that hr
fathr had not th smallst intntion of yilding; but his answrs wr
at th sam tim so vagu and quivocal, that hr mothr, though oftn
dishartnd, had nvr yt dspaird of succding at last.

lizabth’s impatinc to acquaint Jan with what had happnd could no
longr b ovrcom; and at lngth rsolving to supprss vry particular
in which hr sistr was concrnd, and prparing hr to b surprisd,
sh rlatd to hr th nxt morning th chif of th scn btwn Mr.
Darcy and hrslf.

Miss Bnnt’s astonishmnt was soon lssnd by th strong sistrly
partiality which mad any admiration of lizabth appar prfctly
natural; and all surpris was shortly lost in othr flings. Sh was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should hav dlivrd his sntimnts in a mannr so
littl suitd to rcommnd thm; but still mor was sh grivd for th
unhappinss which hr sistr’s rfusal must hav givn him.

“His bing so sur of succding was wrong,” said sh, “and crtainly
ought not to hav appard; but considr how much it must incras his
disappointmnt.”

“Indd,” rplid lizabth, “I am hartily sorry for him; but h has
othr flings which will probably soon driv away his rgard for m.
You do not blam m, howvr, for rfusing him?”

“Blam you! Oh, no.”

“But you blam m for having spokn so warmly of Wickham?”

“No--I do not know that you wr wrong in saying what you did.”

“But you _will_ know it, whn I hav told you what happnd th vry
nxt day.”

Sh thn spok of th lttr, rpating th whol of its contnts as far
as thy concrnd Gorg Wickham. What a strok was this for poor Jan,
who would willingly hav gon through th world without bliving that
so much wickdnss xistd in th whol rac of mankind as was hr
collctd in on individual! Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though
gratful to hr flings, capabl of consoling hr for such discovry.
Most arnstly did sh labour to prov th probability of rror, and
sk to clar on, without involving th othr.

“This will not do,” said lizabth; “you nvr will b abl to mak both
of thm good for anything. Tak your choic, but you must b satisfid
with only on. Thr is but such a quantity of mrit btwn thm; just
nough to mak on good sort of man; and of lat it has bn shifting
about prtty much. For my part, I am inclind to bliv it all Mr.
Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choos.”

It was som tim, howvr, bfor a smil could b xtortd from Jan.

“I do not know whn I hav bn mor shockd,” said sh. “Wickham so
vry bad! It is almost past blif. And poor Mr. Darcy! dar Lizzy,
only considr what h must hav suffrd. Such a disappointmnt! and
with th knowldg of your ill opinion too! and having to rlat such a
thing of his sistr! It is rally too distrssing, I am sur you must
fl it so.”

“Oh no, my rgrt and compassion ar all don away by sing you so full
of both. I know you will do him such ampl justic, that I am growing
vry momnt mor unconcrnd and indiffrnt. Your profusion maks m
saving; and if you lamnt ovr him much longr, my hart will b as
light as a fathr.”

“Poor Wickham! thr is such an xprssion of goodnss in his
countnanc! such an opnnss and gntlnss in his mannr.”

“Thr crtainly was som grat mismanagmnt in th ducation of thos
two young mn. On has got all th goodnss, and th othr all th
apparanc of it.”

“I nvr thought Mr. Darcy so dficint in th _apparanc_ of it as you
usd to do.”

“And yt I mant to b uncommonly clvr in taking so dcidd a dislik
to him, without any rason. It is such a spur to on’s gnius, such an
opning for wit, to hav a dislik of that kind. On may b continually
abusiv without saying anything just; but on cannot b always laughing
at a man without now and thn stumbling on somthing witty.”

“Lizzy, whn you first rad that lttr, I am sur you could not trat
th mattr as you do now.”

“Indd, I could not. I was uncomfortabl nough, I was vry
uncomfortabl--I may say unhappy. And with no on to spak to of what I
flt, no Jan to comfort m, and say that I had not bn so vry wak,
and vain, and nonsnsical, as I knw I had! Oh, how I wantd you!”

“How unfortunat that you should hav usd such vry strong xprssions
in spaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now thy _do_ appar wholly
undsrvd.”

“Crtainly. But th misfortun of spaking with bittrnss is a most
natural consqunc of th prjudics I had bn ncouraging. Thr is
on point on which I want your advic. I want to b told whthr I
ought, or ought not, to mak our acquaintanc in gnral undrstand
Wickham’s charactr.”

Miss Bnnt pausd a littl, and thn rplid, “Surly thr can b no
occasion for xposing him so dradfully. What is your own opinion?”

“That it ought not to b attmptd. Mr. Darcy has not authorizd m to
mak his communication public. On th contrary, vry particular
rlativ to his sistr was mant to b kpt as much as possibl to
myslf; and if I ndavour to undciv popl as to th rst of his
conduct, who will bliv m? Th gnral prjudic against Mr. Darcy is
so violnt, that it would b th dath of half th good popl in
Mryton, to attmpt to plac him in an amiabl light. I am not qual to
it. Wickham will soon b gon; and, thrfor, it will not signify to
anybody hr what h rally is. Som tim hnc it will b all found
out, and thn w may laugh at thir stupidity in not knowing it bfor.
At prsnt I will say nothing about it.”

“You ar quit right. To hav his rrors mad public might ruin him for
vr. H is now, prhaps, sorry for what h has don, and anxious to
r-stablish a charactr. W must not mak him dsprat.”

Th tumult of lizabth’s mind was allayd by this convrsation. Sh
had got rid of two of th scrts which had wighd on hr for a
fortnight, and was crtain of a willing listnr in Jan, whnvr sh
might wish to talk again of ithr. But thr was still somthing
lurking bhind, of which prudnc forbad th disclosur. Sh dard not
rlat th othr half of Mr. Darcy’s lttr, nor xplain to hr sistr
how sincrly sh had bn valud by his frind. Hr was knowldg in
which no on could partak; and sh was snsibl that nothing lss than
a prfct undrstanding btwn th partis could justify hr in
throwing off this last ncumbranc of mystry. “And thn,” said sh, “if
that vry improbabl vnt should vr tak plac, I shall mrly b
abl to tll what Bingly may tll in a much mor agrabl mannr
himslf. Th librty of communication cannot b min till it has lost
all its valu!”

Sh was now, on bing sttld at hom, at lisur to obsrv th ral
stat of hr sistr’s spirits. Jan was not happy. Sh still chrishd a
vry tndr affction for Bingly. Having nvr vn fancid hrslf in
lov bfor, hr rgard had all th warmth of first attachmnt, and from
hr ag and disposition, gratr stadinss than first attachmnts oftn
boast; and so frvntly did sh valu his rmmbranc, and prfr him to
vry othr man, that all hr good sns, and all hr attntion to th
flings of hr frinds, wr rquisit to chck th indulgnc of thos
rgrts which must hav bn injurious to hr own halth and thir
tranquillity.

“Wll, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bnnt, on day, “what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad businss of Jan’s? For my part, I am dtrmind nvr to spak
of it again to anybody. I told my sistr Philips so th othr day. But I
cannot find out that Jan saw anything of him in London. Wll, h is a
vry undsrving young man--and I do not suppos thr is th last
chanc in th world of hr vr gtting him now. Thr is no talk of his
coming to Nthrfild again in th summr; and I hav inquird of
vrybody, too, who is likly to know.”

“I do not bliv that h will vr liv at Nthrfild any mor.”

“Oh, wll! it is just as h chooss. Nobody wants him to com; though I
shall always say that h usd my daughtr xtrmly ill; and, if I was
hr, I would not hav put up with it. Wll, my comfort is, I am sur
Jan will di of a brokn hart, and thn h will b sorry for what h
has don.”

But as lizabth could not rciv comfort from any such xpctation sh
mad no answr.

“Wll, Lizzy,” continud hr mothr, soon aftrwards, “and so th
Collinss liv vry comfortabl, do thy? Wll, wll, I only hop it
will last. And what sort of tabl do thy kp? Charlott is an
xcllnt managr, I dar say. If sh is half as sharp as hr mothr,
sh is saving nough. Thr is nothing xtravagant in _thir_
houskping, I dar say.”

“No, nothing at all.”

“A grat dal of good managmnt, dpnd upon it. Ys, ys. _Thy_ will
tak car not to outrun thir incom. _Thy_ will nvr b distrssd
for mony. Wll, much good may it do thm! And so, I suppos, thy oftn
talk of having Longbourn whn your fathr is dad. Thy look upon it
quit as thir own, I dar say, whnvr that happns.”

“It was a subjct which thy could not mntion bfor m.”

“No; it would hav bn strang if thy had. But I mak no doubt thy
oftn talk of it btwn thmslvs. Wll, if thy can b asy with an
stat that is not lawfully thir own, so much th bttr. _I_ should b
ashamd of having on that was only ntaild on m.”

Th first wk of thir rturn was soon gon. Th scond bgan. It was
th last of th rgimnt’s stay in Mryton, and all th young ladis in
th nighbourhood wr drooping apac. Th djction was almost
univrsal. Th ldr Miss Bnnts alon wr still abl to at, drink,
and slp, and pursu th usual cours of thir mploymnts. Vry
frquntly wr thy rproachd for this insnsibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whos own misry was xtrm, and who could not comprhnd such
hard-hartdnss in any of th family.

“Good Havn! What is to bcom of us? What ar w to do?” would thy
oftn xclaim in th bittrnss of wo. “How can you b smiling so,
Lizzy?”

Thir affctionat mothr shard all thir grif; sh rmmbrd what
sh had hrslf ndurd on a similar occasion fiv-and-twnty yars ago.

“I am sur,” said sh, “I crid for two days togthr whn Colonl
Millr’s rgimnt wnt away. I thought I should hav brok my hart.”

“I am sur I shall brak _min_,” said Lydia.

“If on could but go to Brighton!” obsrvd Mrs. Bnnt.

“Oh ys!--if on could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagrabl.”

“A littl sa-bathing would st m up for vr.”

“And my aunt Philips is sur it would do _m_ a grat dal of good,”
addd Kitty.

Such wr th kind of lamntations rsounding prptually through
Longbourn Hous. lizabth trid to b divrtd by thm; but all sns
of plasur was lost in sham. Sh flt anw th justic of Mr. Darcy’s
objctions; and nvr had sh bfor bn so much disposd to pardon his
intrfrnc in th viws of his frind.

But th gloom of Lydia’s prospct was shortly clard away; for sh
rcivd an invitation from Mrs. Forstr, th wif of th colonl of th
rgimnt, to accompany hr to Brighton. This invaluabl frind was a
vry young woman, and vry latly marrid. A rsmblanc in good-humour
and good spirits had rcommndd hr and Lydia to ach othr, and out of
thir _thr_ months’ acquaintanc thy had bn intimat _two_.

Th raptur of Lydia on this occasion, hr adoration of Mrs. Forstr,
th dlight of Mrs. Bnnt, and th mortification of Kitty, ar scarcly
to b dscribd. Wholly inattntiv to hr sistr’s flings, Lydia flw
about th hous in rstlss cstasy, calling for vryon’s
congratulations, and laughing and talking with mor violnc than vr;
whilst th lucklss Kitty continud in th parlour rpining at hr fat
in trms as unrasonabl as hr accnt was pvish.

“I cannot s why Mrs. Forstr should not ask _m_ as wll as Lydia,”
said sh, “though I am _not_ hr particular frind. I hav just as much
right to b askd as sh has, and mor too, for I am two yars oldr.”

In vain did lizabth attmpt to mak hr rasonabl, and Jan to mak
hr rsignd. As for lizabth hrslf, this invitation was so far from
xciting in hr th sam flings as in hr mothr and Lydia, that sh
considrd it as th dath-warrant of all possibility of common sns
for th lattr; and dtstabl as such a stp must mak hr, wr it
known, sh could not hlp scrtly advising hr fathr not to lt hr
go. Sh rprsntd to him all th impropritis of Lydia’s gnral
bhaviour, th littl advantag sh could driv from th frindship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forstr, and th probability of hr bing yt mor
imprudnt with such a companion at Brighton, whr th tmptations must
b gratr than at hom. H hard hr attntivly, and thn said,--

“Lydia will nvr b asy till sh has xposd hrslf in som public
plac or othr, and w can nvr xpct hr to do it with so littl
xpns or inconvninc to hr family as undr th prsnt
circumstancs.”

“If you wr awar,” said lizabth, “of th vry grat disadvantag to
us all, which must aris from th public notic of Lydia’s unguardd and
imprudnt mannr, nay, which has alrady arisn from it, I am sur you
would judg diffrntly in th affair.”

“Alrady arisn!” rpatd Mr. Bnnt. “What! has sh frightnd away
som of your lovrs? Poor littl Lizzy! But do not b cast down. Such
squamish youths as cannot bar to b connctd with a littl absurdity
ar not worth a rgrt. Com, lt m s th list of th pitiful fllows
who hav bn kpt aloof by Lydia’s folly.”

“Indd, you ar mistakn. I hav no such injuris to rsnt. It is not
of pculiar, but of gnral vils, which I am now complaining. Our
importanc, our rspctability in th world, must b affctd by th
wild volatility, th assuranc and disdain of all rstraint which mark
Lydia’s charactr. xcus m,--for I must spak plainly. If you, my dar
fathr, will not tak th troubl of chcking hr xubrant spirits, and
of taching hr that hr prsnt pursuits ar not to b th businss of
hr lif, sh will soon b byond th rach of amndmnt. Hr charactr
will b fixd; and sh will, at sixtn, b th most dtrmind flirt
that vr mad hrslf and hr family ridiculous;--a flirt, too, in th
worst and manst dgr of flirtation; without any attraction byond
youth and a tolrabl prson; and, from th ignoranc and mptinss of
hr mind, wholly unabl to ward off any portion of that univrsal
contmpt which hr rag for admiration will xcit. In this dangr Kitty
is also comprhndd. Sh will follow whrvr Lydia lads. Vain,
ignorant, idl, and absolutly uncontrolld! Oh, my dar fathr, can you
suppos it possibl that thy will not b cnsurd and dspisd whrvr
thy ar known, and that thir sistrs will not b oftn involvd in th
disgrac?”

Mr. Bnnt saw that hr whol hart was in th subjct; and,
affctionatly taking hr hand, said, in rply,--

“Do not mak yourslf unasy, my lov. Whrvr you and Jan ar known,
you must b rspctd and valud; and you will not appar to lss
advantag for having a coupl of--or I may say, thr--vry silly
sistrs. W shall hav no pac at Longbourn if Lydia dos not go to
Brighton. Lt hr go, thn. Colonl Forstr is a snsibl man, and will
kp hr out of any ral mischif; and sh is luckily too poor to b an
objct of pry to anybody. At Brighton sh will b of lss importanc
vn as a common flirt than sh has bn hr. Th officrs will find
womn bttr worth thir notic. Lt us hop, thrfor, that hr bing
thr may tach hr hr own insignificanc. At any rat, sh cannot grow
many dgrs wors, without authorizing us to lock hr up for th rst
of hr lif.”

With this answr lizabth was forcd to b contnt; but hr own opinion
continud th sam, and sh lft him disappointd and sorry. It was not
in hr natur, howvr, to incras hr vxations by dwlling on thm.
Sh was confidnt of having prformd hr duty; and to frt ovr
unavoidabl vils, or augmnt thm by anxity, was no part of hr
disposition.

Had Lydia and hr mothr known th substanc of hr confrnc with hr
fathr, thir indignation would hardly hav found xprssion in thir
unitd volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprisd
vry possibility of arthly happinss. Sh saw, with th crativ y
of fancy, th strts of that gay bathing-plac covrd with officrs.
Sh saw hrslf th objct of attntion to tns and to scors of thm at
prsnt unknown. Sh saw all th gloris of th camp: its tnts
strtchd forth in bautous uniformity of lins, crowdd with th young
and th gay, and dazzling with scarlt; and, to complt th viw, sh
saw hrslf satd bnath a tnt, tndrly flirting with at last six
officrs at onc.

Had sh known that hr sistr sought to tar hr from such prospcts and
such ralitis as ths, what would hav bn hr snsations? Thy could
hav bn undrstood only by hr mothr, who might hav flt narly th
sam. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consold hr for th
mlancholy conviction of hr husband’s nvr intnding to go thr
himslf.

But thy wr ntirly ignorant of what had passd; and thir rapturs
continud, with littl intrmission, to th vry day of Lydia’s laving
hom.

lizabth was now to s Mr. Wickham for th last tim. Having bn
frquntly in company with him sinc hr rturn, agitation was prtty
wll ovr; th agitations of formr partiality ntirly so. Sh had vn
larnt to dtct, in th vry gntlnss which had first dlightd hr,
an affctation and a samnss to disgust and wary. In his prsnt
bhaviour to hrslf, morovr, sh had a frsh sourc of displasur;
for th inclination h soon tstifid of rnwing thos attntions which
had markd th arly part of thir acquaintanc could only srv, aftr
what had sinc passd, to provok hr. Sh lost all concrn for him in
finding hrslf thus slctd as th objct of such idl and frivolous
gallantry; and whil sh stadily rprssd it, could not but fl th
rproof containd in his bliving, that howvr long, and for whatvr
caus, his attntions had bn withdrawn, hr vanity would b gratifid,
and hr prfrnc scurd, at any tim, by thir rnwal.

On th vry last day of th rgimnt’s rmaining in Mryton, h dind,
with othrs of th officrs, at Longbourn; and so littl was lizabth
disposd to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making som
inquiry as to th mannr in which hr tim had passd at Hunsford, sh
mntiond Colonl Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spnt thr
wks at Rosings, and askd him if h wr acquaintd with th formr.

H lookd surprisd, displasd, alarmd; but, with a momnt’s
rcollction, and a rturning smil, rplid, that h had formrly sn
him oftn; and, aftr obsrving that h was a vry gntlmanlik man,
askd hr how sh had likd him. Hr answr was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indiffrnc, h soon aftrwards addd, “How long did you
say that h was at Rosings?”

“Narly thr wks.”

“And you saw him frquntly?”

“Ys, almost vry day.”

“His mannrs ar vry diffrnt from his cousin’s.”

“Ys, vry diffrnt; but I think Mr. Darcy improvs on acquaintanc.”

“Indd!” crid Wickham, with a look which did not scap hr. “And pray
may I ask--” but chcking himslf, h addd, in a gayr ton, “Is it in
addrss that h improvs? Has h dignd to add aught of civility to his
ordinary styl? for I dar not hop,” h continud, in a lowr and mor
srious ton, “that h is improvd in ssntials.”

“Oh, no!” said lizabth. “In ssntials, I bliv, h is vry much
what h vr was.”

Whil sh spok, Wickham lookd as if scarcly knowing whthr to
rjoic ovr hr words or to distrust thir maning. Thr was a
somthing in hr countnanc which mad him listn with an apprhnsiv
and anxious attntion, whil sh addd,--

“Whn I said that h improvd on acquaintanc, I did not man that
ithr his mind or mannrs wr in a stat of improvmnt; but that,
from knowing him bttr, his disposition was bttr undrstood.”

Wickham’s alarm now appard in a hightnd complxion and agitatd
look; for a fw minuts h was silnt; till, shaking off his
mbarrassmnt, h turnd to hr again, and said in th gntlst of
accnts,--

“You, who so wll know my flings towards Mr. Darcy, will radily
comprhnd how sincrly I must rjoic that h is wis nough to assum
vn th _apparanc_ of what is right. His prid, in that dirction,
may b of srvic, if not to himslf, to many othrs, for it must dtr
him from such foul misconduct as I hav suffrd by. I only far that
th sort of cautiousnss to which you, I imagin, hav bn alluding, is
mrly adoptd on his visits to his aunt, of whos good opinion and
judgmnt h stands much in aw. His far of hr has always opratd, I
know, whn thy wr togthr; and a good dal is to b imputd to his
wish of forwarding th match with Miss d Bourgh, which I am crtain h
has vry much at hart.”

lizabth could not rprss a smil at this, but sh answrd only by a
slight inclination of th had. Sh saw that h wantd to ngag hr on
th old subjct of his grivancs, and sh was in no humour to indulg
him. Th rst of th vning passd with th _apparanc_, on his sid,
of usual chrfulnss, but with no furthr attmpt to distinguish
lizabth; and thy partd at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual dsir of nvr mting again.

Whn th party brok up, Lydia rturnd with Mrs. Forstr to Mryton,
from whnc thy wr to st out arly th nxt morning. Th sparation
btwn hr and hr family was rathr noisy than pathtic. Kitty was th
only on who shd tars; but sh did wp from vxation and nvy. Mrs.
Bnnt was diffus in hr good wishs for th flicity of hr daughtr,
and imprssiv in hr injunctions that sh would not miss th
opportunity of njoying hrslf as much as possibl,--advic which thr
was vry rason to bliv would b attndd to; and, in th clamorous
happinss of Lydia hrslf in bidding farwll, th mor gntl adius
of hr sistrs wr uttrd without bing hard.

Had lizabth’s opinion bn all drawn from hr own family, sh could
not hav formd a vry plasing pictur of conjugal flicity or domstic
comfort. Hr fathr, captivatd by youth and bauty, and that apparanc
of good-humour which youth and bauty gnrally giv, had marrid a
woman whos wak undrstanding and illibral mind had vry arly in
thir marriag put an nd to all ral affction for hr. Rspct,
stm, and confidnc had vanishd for vr; and all his viws of
domstic happinss wr ovrthrown. But Mr. Bnnt was not of a
disposition to sk comfort for th disappointmnt which his own
imprudnc had brought on in any of thos plasurs which too oftn
consol th unfortunat for thir folly or thir vic. H was fond of
th country and of books; and from ths tasts had arisn his principal
njoymnts. To his wif h was vry littl othrwis indbtd than as
hr ignoranc and folly had contributd to his amusmnt. This is not
th sort of happinss which a man would in gnral wish to ow to his
wif; but whr othr powrs of ntrtainmnt ar wanting, th tru
philosophr will driv bnfit from such as ar givn.

lizabth, howvr, had nvr bn blind to th improprity of hr
fathr’s bhaviour as a husband. Sh had always sn it with pain; but
rspcting his abilitis, and gratful for his affctionat tratmnt of
hrslf, sh ndavourd to forgt what sh could not ovrlook, and to
banish from hr thoughts that continual brach of conjugal obligation
and dcorum which, in xposing his wif to th contmpt of hr own
childrn, was so highly rprhnsibl. But sh had nvr flt so
strongly as now th disadvantags which must attnd th childrn of so
unsuitabl a marriag, nor vr bn so fully awar of th vils arising
from so ill-judgd a dirction of talnts--talnts which, rightly usd,
might at last hav prsrvd th rspctability of his daughtrs, vn
if incapabl of nlarging th mind of his wif.

Whn lizabth had rjoicd ovr Wickham’s dpartur, sh found littl
othr caus for satisfaction in th loss of th rgimnt. Thir partis
abroad wr lss varid than bfor; and at hom sh had a mothr and
sistr, whos constant rpinings at th dulnss of vrything around
thm thrw a ral gloom ovr thir domstic circl; and, though Kitty
might in tim rgain hr natural dgr of sns, sinc th disturbrs
of hr brain wr rmovd, hr othr sistr, from whos disposition
gratr vil might b apprhndd, was likly to b hardnd in all hr
folly and assuranc, by a situation of such doubl dangr as a
watring-plac and a camp. Upon th whol, thrfor, sh found, what
has bn somtims found bfor, that an vnt to which sh had lookd
forward with impatint dsir, did not, in taking plac, bring all th
satisfaction sh had promisd hrslf. It was consquntly ncssary to
nam som othr priod for th commncmnt of actual flicity; to hav
som othr point on which hr wishs and hops might b fixd, and by
again njoying th plasur of anticipation, consol hrslf for th
prsnt, and prpar for anothr disappointmnt. Hr tour to th Laks
was now th objct of hr happist thoughts: it was hr bst consolation
for all th uncomfortabl hours which th discontntdnss of hr mothr
and Kitty mad invitabl; and could sh hav includd Jan in th
schm, vry part of it would hav bn prfct.

“But it is fortunat,” thought sh, “that I hav somthing to wish for.
Wr th whol arrangmnt complt, my disappointmnt would b crtain.
But hr, by carrying with m on caslss sourc of rgrt in my
sistr’s absnc, I may rasonably hop to hav all my xpctations of
plasur ralizd. A schm of which vry part promiss dlight can
nvr b succssful; and gnral disappointmnt is only wardd off by
th dfnc of som littl pculiar vxation.”

Whn Lydia wnt away sh promisd to writ vry oftn and vry minutly
to hr mothr and Kitty; but hr lttrs wr always long xpctd, and
always vry short. Thos to hr mothr containd littl ls than that
thy wr just rturnd from th library, whr such and such officrs
had attndd thm, and whr sh had sn such bautiful ornamnts as
mad hr quit wild; that sh had a nw gown, or a nw parasol, which
sh would hav dscribd mor fully, but was obligd to lav off in a
violnt hurry, as Mrs. Forstr calld hr, and thy wr going to th
camp; and from hr corrspondnc with hr sistr thr was still lss
to b larnt, for hr lttrs to Kitty, though rathr longr, wr much
too full of lins undr th words to b mad public.

Aftr th first fortnight or thr wks of hr absnc, halth,
good-humour, and chrfulnss bgan to rappar at Longbourn. vrything
wor a happir aspct. Th familis who had bn in town for th wintr
cam back again, and summr finry and summr ngagmnts aros. Mrs.
Bnnt was rstord to hr usual qurulous srnity; and by th middl
of Jun Kitty was so much rcovrd as to b abl to ntr Mryton
without tars,--an vnt of such happy promis as to mak lizabth
hop, that by th following Christmas sh might b so tolrably
rasonabl as not to mntion an officr abov onc a day, unlss, by
som crul and malicious arrangmnt at th War Offic, anothr rgimnt
should b quartrd in Mryton.

Th tim fixd for th bginning of thir northrn tour was now fast
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, whn a lttr
arrivd from Mrs. Gardinr, which at onc dlayd its commncmnt and
curtaild its xtnt. Mr. Gardinr would b prvntd by businss from
stting out till a fortnight latr in July, and must b in London again
within a month; and as that lft too short a priod for thm to go so
far, and s so much as thy had proposd, or at last to s it with
th lisur and comfort thy had built on, thy wr obligd to giv up
th Laks, and substitut a mor contractd tour; and, according to th
prsnt plan, wr to go no farthr northward than Drbyshir. In that
county thr was nough to b sn to occupy th chif of thir thr
wks; and to Mrs. Gardinr it had a pculiarly strong attraction. Th
town whr sh had formrly passd som yars of hr lif, and whr
thy wr now to spnd a fw days, was probably as grat an objct of
hr curiosity as all th clbratd bautis of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovdal, or th Pak.

lizabth was xcssivly disappointd: sh had st hr hart on sing
th Laks; and still thought thr might hav bn tim nough. But it
was hr businss to b satisfid--and crtainly hr tmpr to b happy;
and all was soon right again.

With th mntion of Drbyshir, thr wr many idas connctd. It was
impossibl for hr to s th word without thinking of Pmbrly and its
ownr. “But surly,” said sh, “I may ntr his county with impunity,
and rob it of a fw ptrifid spars, without his prciving m.”

Th priod of xpctation was now doubld. Four wks wr to pass away
bfor hr uncl and aunt’s arrival. But thy did pass away, and Mr. and
Mrs. Gardinr, with thir four childrn, did at lngth appar at
Longbourn. Th childrn, two girls of six and ight yars old, and two
youngr boys, wr to b lft undr th particular car of thir cousin
Jan, who was th gnral favourit, and whos stady sns and
swtnss of tmpr xactly adaptd hr for attnding to thm in vry
way--taching thm, playing with thm, and loving thm.

Th Gardinrs stayd only on night at Longbourn, and st off th nxt
morning with lizabth in pursuit of novlty and amusmnt. On
njoymnt was crtain--that of suitablnss as companions; a
suitablnss which comprhndd halth and tmpr to bar
inconvnincs--chrfulnss to nhanc vry plasur--and affction
and intllignc, which might supply it among thmslvs if thr wr
disappointmnts abroad.

It is not th objct of this work to giv a dscription of Drbyshir,
nor of any of th rmarkabl placs through which thir rout thithr
lay--Oxford, Blnhim, Warwick, Knilworth, Birmingham, tc., ar
sufficintly known. A small part of Drbyshir is all th prsnt
concrn. To th littl town of Lambton, th scn of Mrs. Gardinr’s
formr rsidnc, and whr sh had latly larnd that som
acquaintanc still rmaind, thy bnt thir stps, aftr having sn
all th principal wondrs of th country; and within fiv mils of
Lambton, lizabth found, from hr aunt, that Pmbrly was situatd. It
was not in thir dirct road; nor mor than a mil or two out of it. In
talking ovr thir rout th vning bfor, Mrs. Gardinr xprssd an
inclination to s th plac again. Mr. Gardinr dclard his
willingnss, and lizabth was applid to for hr approbation.

“My lov, should not you lik to s a plac of which you hav hard so
much?” said hr aunt. “A plac, too, with which so many of your
acquaintanc ar connctd. Wickham passd all his youth thr, you
know.”

lizabth was distrssd. Sh flt that sh had no businss at
Pmbrly, and was obligd to assum a disinclination for sing it. Sh
must own that sh was tird of grat houss: aftr going ovr so many,
sh rally had no plasur in fin carpts or satin curtains.

Mrs. Gardinr abusd hr stupidity. “If it wr mrly a fin hous
richly furnishd,” said sh, “I should not car about it myslf; but th
grounds ar dlightful. Thy hav som of th finst woods in th
country.”

lizabth said no mor; but hr mind could not acquisc. Th
possibility of mting Mr. Darcy, whil viwing th plac, instantly
occurrd. It would b dradful! Sh blushd at th vry ida; and
thought it would b bttr to spak opnly to hr aunt, than to run such
a risk. But against this thr wr objctions; and sh finally rsolvd
that it could b th last rsourc, if hr privat inquiris as to th
absnc of th family wr unfavourably answrd.

Accordingly, whn sh rtird at night, sh askd th chambrmaid
whthr Pmbrly wr not a vry fin plac, what was th nam of its
propritor, and, with no littl alarm, whthr th family wr down for
th summr? A most wlcom ngativ followd th last qustion; and hr
alarms bing now rmovd, sh was at lisur to fl a grat dal of
curiosity to s th hous hrslf; and whn th subjct was rvivd th
nxt morning, and sh was again applid to, could radily answr, and
with a propr air of indiffrnc, that sh had not rally any dislik
to th schm.

To Pmbrly, thrfor, thy wr to go.

lizabth, as thy drov along, watchd for th first apparanc of
Pmbrly Woods with som prturbation; and whn at lngth thy turnd
in at th lodg, hr spirits wr in a high fluttr.

Th park was vry larg, and containd grat varity of ground. Thy
ntrd it in on of its lowst points, and drov for som tim through
a bautiful wood strtching ovr a wid xtnt.

lizabth’s mind was too full for convrsation, but sh saw and admird
vry rmarkabl spot and point of viw. Thy gradually ascndd for
half a mil, and thn found thmslvs at th top of a considrabl
minnc, whr th wood casd, and th y was instantly caught by
Pmbrly Hous, situatd on th opposit sid of th vally, into which
th road with som abruptnss wound. It was a larg, handsom ston
building, standing wll on rising ground, and backd by a ridg of high
woody hills; and in front a stram of som natural importanc was
swlld into gratr, but without any artificial apparanc. Its banks
wr nithr formal nor falsly adornd. lizabth was dlightd. Sh
had nvr sn a plac for which natur had don mor, or whr natural
bauty had bn so littl countractd by an awkward tast. Thy wr
all of thm warm in thir admiration; and at that momnt sh flt that
to b mistrss of Pmbrly might b somthing!

Thy dscndd th hill, crossd th bridg, and drov to th door; and,
whil xamining th narr aspct of th hous, all hr apprhnsion of
mting its ownr rturnd. Sh dradd lst th chambrmaid had bn
mistakn. On applying to s th plac, thy wr admittd into th
hall; and lizabth, as thy waitd for th houskpr, had lisur to
wondr at hr bing whr sh was.

Th houskpr cam; a rspctabl looking ldrly woman, much lss
fin, and mor civil, than sh had any notion of finding hr. Thy
followd hr into th dining-parlour. It was a larg, wll-proportiond
room, handsomly fittd up. lizabth, aftr slightly survying it, wnt
to a window to njoy its prospct. Th hill, crownd with wood, from
which thy had dscndd, rciving incrasd abruptnss from th
distanc, was a bautiful objct. vry disposition of th ground was
good; and sh lookd on th whol scn, th rivr, th trs scattrd
on its banks, and th winding of th vally, as far as sh could trac
it, with dlight. As thy passd into othr rooms, ths objcts wr
taking diffrnt positions; but from vry window thr wr bautis
to b sn. Th rooms wr lofty and handsom, and thir furnitur
suitabl to th fortun of thir propritor; but lizabth saw, with
admiration of his tast, that it was nithr gaudy nor uslssly
fin,--with lss of splndour, and mor ral lganc, than th
furnitur of Rosings.

“And of this plac,” thought sh, “I might hav bn mistrss! With
ths rooms I might hav now bn familiarly acquaintd! Instad of
viwing thm as a strangr, I might hav rjoicd in thm as my own, and
wlcomd to thm as visitors my uncl and aunt. But, no,” rcollcting
hrslf, “that could nvr b; my uncl and aunt would hav bn lost to
m; I should not hav bn allowd to invit thm.”

This was a lucky rcollction--it savd hr from somthing lik rgrt.

Sh longd to inquir of th houskpr whthr hr mastr wr rally
absnt, but had not courag for it. At lngth, howvr, th qustion was
askd by hr uncl; and sh turnd away with alarm, whil Mrs. Rynolds
rplid, that h was; adding, “But w xpct him to-morrow, with a larg
party of frinds.” How rjoicd was lizabth that thir own journy had
not by any circumstanc bn dlayd a day!

Hr aunt now calld hr to look at a pictur. Sh approachd, and saw
th liknss of Mr. Wickham, suspndd, amongst svral othr
miniaturs, ovr th mantl-pic. Hr aunt askd hr, smilingly, how
sh likd it. Th houskpr cam forward, and told thm it was th
pictur of a young gntlman, th son of hr lat mastr’s stward, who
had bn brought up by him at his own xpns. “H is now gon into th
army,” sh addd; “but I am afraid h has turnd out vry wild.”

Mrs. Gardinr lookd at hr nic with a smil, but lizabth could not
rturn it.

“And that,” said Mrs. Rynolds, pointing to anothr of th miniaturs,
“is my mastr--and vry lik him. It was drawn at th sam tim as th
othr--about ight yars ago.”

“I hav hard much of your mastr’s fin prson,” said Mrs. Gardinr,
looking at th pictur; “it is a handsom fac. But, Lizzy, you can tll
us whthr it is lik or not.”

Mrs. Rynolds’ rspct for lizabth smd to incras on this
intimation of hr knowing hr mastr.

“Dos that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”

lizabth colourd, and said, “A littl.”

“And do not you think him a vry handsom gntlman, ma’am?”

“Ys, vry handsom.”

“I am sur _I_ know non so handsom; but in th gallry upstairs you
will s a finr, largr pictur of him than this. This room was my lat
mastr’s favourit room, and ths miniaturs ar just as thy usd to
b thn. H was vry fond of thm.”

This accountd to lizabth for Mr. Wickham’s bing among thm.

Mrs. Rynolds thn dirctd thir attntion to on of Miss Darcy, drawn
whn sh was only ight yars old.

“And is Miss Darcy as handsom as hr brothr?” said Mr. Gardinr.

“Oh, ys--th handsomst young lady that vr was sn; and so
accomplishd! Sh plays and sings all day long. In th nxt room is a
nw instrumnt just com down for hr--a prsnt from my mastr: sh
coms hr to-morrow with him.”

Mr. Gardinr, whos mannrs wr asy and plasant, ncouragd hr
communicativnss by his qustions and rmarks: Mrs. Rynolds, ithr
from prid or attachmnt, had vidntly grat plasur in talking of hr
mastr and his sistr.

“Is your mastr much at Pmbrly in th cours of th yar?”

“Not so much as I could wish, sir: but I dar say h may spnd half his
tim hr; and Miss Darcy is always down for th summr months.”

“xcpt,” thought lizabth, “whn sh gos to Ramsgat.”

“If your mastr would marry, you might s mor of him.”

“Ys, sir; but I do not know whn _that_ will b. I do not know who is
good nough for him.”

Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr smild. lizabth could not hlp saying, “It is
vry much to his crdit, I am sur, that you should think so.”

“I say no mor than th truth, and what vrybody will say that knows
him,” rplid th othr. lizabth thought this was going prtty far;
and sh listnd with incrasing astonishmnt as th houskpr addd,
“I hav nvr had a cross word from him in my lif, and I hav known him
vr sinc h was four yars old.”

This was prais of all othrs most xtraordinary, most opposit to hr
idas. That h was not a good-tmprd man had bn hr firmst opinion.
Hr knst attntion was awaknd: sh longd to har mor; and was
gratful to hr uncl for saying,--

“Thr ar vry fw popl of whom so much can b said. You ar lucky in
having such a mastr.”

“Ys, sir, I know I am. If I wr to go through th world, I could not
mt with a bttr. But I hav always obsrvd, that thy who ar
good-naturd whn childrn, ar good-naturd whn thy grow up; and h
was always th swtst tmprd, most gnrous-hartd boy in th
world.”

lizabth almost stard at hr. “Can this b Mr. Darcy?” thought sh.

“His fathr was an xcllnt man,” said Mrs. Gardinr.

“Ys, ma’am, that h was indd; and his son will b just lik him--just
as affabl to th poor.”

lizabth listnd, wondrd, doubtd, and was impatint for mor. Mrs.
Rynolds could intrst hr on no othr point. Sh rlatd th subjcts
of th picturs, th dimnsions of th rooms, and th pric of th
furnitur in vain. Mr. Gardinr, highly amusd by th kind of family
prjudic, to which h attributd hr xcssiv commndation of hr
mastr, soon ld again to th subjct; and sh dwlt with nrgy on his
many mrits, as thy procdd togthr up th grat staircas.

“H is th bst landlord, and th bst mastr,” said sh, “that vr
livd. Not lik th wild young mn now-a-days, who think of nothing but
thmslvs. Thr is not on of his tnants or srvants but what will
giv him a good nam. Som popl call him proud; but I am sur I nvr
saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only bcaus h dos not rattl
away lik othr young mn.”

“In what an amiabl light dos this plac him!” thought lizabth.

“This fin account of him,” whisprd hr aunt as thy walkd, “is not
quit consistnt with his bhaviour to our poor frind.”

“Prhaps w might b dcivd.”

“That is not vry likly; our authority was too good.”

On raching th spacious lobby abov, thy wr shown into a vry prtty
sitting-room, latly fittd up with gratr lganc and lightnss than
th apartmnts blow; and wr informd that it was but just don to
giv plasur to Miss Darcy, who had takn a liking to th room, whn
last at Pmbrly.

“H is crtainly a good brothr,” said lizabth, as sh walkd towards
on of th windows.

Mrs. Rynolds anticipatd Miss Darcy’s dlight, whn sh should ntr
th room. “And this is always th way with him,” sh addd. “Whatvr
can giv his sistr any plasur, is sur to b don in a momnt. Thr
is nothing h would not do for hr.”

Th pictur gallry, and two or thr of th principal bd-rooms, wr
all that rmaind to b shown. In th formr wr many good paintings:
but lizabth knw nothing of th art; and from such as had bn alrady
visibl blow, sh had willingly turnd to look at som drawings of Miss
Darcy’s, in crayons, whos subjcts wr usually mor intrsting, and
also mor intlligibl.

In th gallry thr wr many family portraits, but thy could hav
littl to fix th attntion of a strangr. lizabth walkd on in qust
of th only fac whos faturs would b known to hr. At last it
arrstd hr--and sh bhld a striking rsmblanc of Mr. Darcy, with
such a smil ovr th fac, as sh rmmbrd to hav somtims sn,
whn h lookd at hr. Sh stood svral minuts bfor th pictur, in
arnst contmplation, and rturnd to it again bfor thy quittd th
gallry. Mrs. Rynolds informd thm, that it had bn takn in his
fathr’s liftim.

Thr was crtainly at this momnt, in lizabth’s mind, a mor gntl
snsation towards th original than sh had vr flt in th hight of
thir acquaintanc. Th commndation bstowd on him by Mrs. Rynolds
was of no trifling natur. What prais is mor valuabl than th prais
of an intllignt srvant? As a brothr, a landlord, a mastr, sh
considrd how many popl’s happinss wr in his guardianship! How
much of plasur or pain it was in his powr to bstow! How much of good
or vil must b don by him! vry ida that had bn brought forward by
th houskpr was favourabl to his charactr; and as sh stood bfor
th canvas, on which h was rprsntd, and fixd his ys upon
hrslf, sh thought of his rgard with a dpr sntimnt of gratitud
than it had vr raisd bfor: sh rmmbrd its warmth, and softnd
its improprity of xprssion.

Whn all of th hous that was opn to gnral inspction had bn sn,
thy rturnd down stairs; and, taking lav of th houskpr, wr
consignd ovr to th gardnr, who mt thm at th hall door.

As thy walkd across th lawn towards th rivr, lizabth turnd back
to look again; hr uncl and aunt stoppd also; and whil th formr was
conjcturing as to th dat of th building, th ownr of it himslf
suddnly cam forward from th road which ld bhind it to th stabls.

Thy wr within twnty yards of ach othr; and so abrupt was his
apparanc, that it was impossibl to avoid his sight. Thir ys
instantly mt, and th chks of ach wr ovrsprad with th dpst
blush. H absolutly startd, and for a momnt smd immovabl from
surpris; but shortly rcovring himslf, advancd towards th party,
and spok to lizabth, if not in trms of prfct composur, at last
of prfct civility.

Sh had instinctivly turnd away; but stopping on his approach,
rcivd his complimnts with an mbarrassmnt impossibl to b
ovrcom. Had his first apparanc, or his rsmblanc to th pictur
thy had just bn xamining, bn insufficint to assur th othr two
that thy now saw Mr. Darcy, th gardnr’s xprssion of surpris, on
bholding his mastr, must immdiatly hav told it. Thy stood a littl
aloof whil h was talking to thir nic, who, astonishd and confusd,
scarcly dard lift hr ys to his fac, and knw not what answr sh
rturnd to his civil inquiris aftr hr family. Amazd at th
altration of his mannr sinc thy last partd, vry sntnc that h
uttrd was incrasing hr mbarrassmnt; and vry ida of th
improprity of hr bing found thr rcurring to hr mind, th fw
minuts in which thy continud togthr wr som of th most
uncomfortabl of hr lif. Nor did h sm much mor at as; whn h
spok, his accnt had non of its usual sdatnss; and h rpatd his
inquiris as to th tim of hr having lft Longbourn, and of hr stay
in Drbyshir, so oftn, and in so hurrid a way, as plainly spok th
distraction of his thoughts.

At lngth, vry ida smd to fail him; and aftr standing a fw
momnts without saying a word, h suddnly rcollctd himslf, and took
lav.

Th othrs thn joind hr, and xprssd thir admiration of his
figur; but lizabth hard not a word, and, wholly ngrossd by hr own
flings, followd thm in silnc. Sh was ovrpowrd by sham and
vxation. Hr coming thr was th most unfortunat, th most ill-judgd
thing in th world! How strang must it appar to him! In what a
disgracful light might it not strik so vain a man! It might sm as if
sh had purposly thrown hrslf in his way again! Oh! why did sh com?
or, why did h thus com a day bfor h was xpctd? Had thy bn
only tn minuts soonr, thy should hav bn byond th rach of his
discrimination; for it was plain that h was that momnt arrivd, that
momnt alightd from his hors or his carriag. Sh blushd again and
again ovr th prvrsnss of th mting. And his bhaviour, so
strikingly altrd,--what could it man? That h should vn spak to
hr was amazing!--but to spak with such civility, to inquir aftr hr
family! Nvr in hr lif had sh sn his mannrs so littl dignifid,
nvr had h spokn with such gntlnss as on this unxpctd mting.
What a contrast did it offr to his last addrss in Rosings Park, whn
h put his lttr into hr hand! Sh knw not what to think, or how to
account for it.

Thy had now ntrd a bautiful walk by th sid of th watr, and
vry stp was bringing forward a noblr fall of ground, or a finr
rach of th woods to which thy wr approaching: but it was som tim
bfor lizabth was snsibl of any of it; and, though sh answrd
mchanically to th rpatd appals of hr uncl and aunt, and smd
to dirct hr ys to such objcts as thy pointd out, sh
distinguishd no part of th scn. Hr thoughts wr all fixd on that
on spot of Pmbrly Hous, whichvr it might b, whr Mr. Darcy thn
was. Sh longd to know what at that momnt was passing in his mind; in
what mannr h thought of hr, and whthr, in dfianc of vrything,
sh was still dar to him. Prhaps h had bn civil only bcaus h
flt himslf at as; yt thr had bn _that_ in his voic, which was
not lik as. Whthr h had flt mor of pain or of plasur in sing
hr, sh could not tll, but h crtainly had not sn hr with
composur.

At lngth, howvr, th rmarks of hr companions on hr absnc of mind
rousd hr, and sh flt th ncssity of apparing mor lik hrslf.

Thy ntrd th woods, and, bidding adiu to th rivr for a whil,
ascndd som of th highr grounds; whnc, in spots whr th opning
of th trs gav th y powr to wandr, wr many charming viws of
th vally, th opposit hills, with th long rang of woods
ovrsprading many, and occasionally part of th stram. Mr. Gardinr
xprssd a wish of going round th whol park, but fard it might b
byond a walk. With a triumphant smil, thy wr told, that it was tn
mils round. It sttld th mattr; and thy pursud th accustomd
circuit; which brought thm again, aftr som tim, in a dscnt among
hanging woods, to th dg of th watr, and on of its narrowst parts.
Thy crossd it by a simpl bridg, in charactr with th gnral air of
th scn: it was a spot lss adornd than any thy had yt visitd; and
th vally, hr contractd into a gln, allowd room only for th
stram, and a narrow walk amidst th rough coppic-wood which bordrd
it. lizabth longd to xplor its windings; but whn thy had crossd
th bridg, and prcivd thir distanc from th hous, Mrs. Gardinr,
who was not a grat walkr, could go no farthr, and thought only of
rturning to th carriag as quickly as possibl. Hr nic was,
thrfor, obligd to submit, and thy took thir way towards th hous
on th opposit sid of th rivr, in th narst dirction; but thir
progrss was slow, for Mr. Gardinr, though sldom abl to indulg th
tast, was vry fond of fishing, and was so much ngagd in watching th
occasional apparanc of som trout in th watr, and talking to th man
about thm, that h advancd but littl. Whilst wandring on in this
slow mannr, thy wr again surprisd, and lizabth’s astonishmnt was
quit qual to what it had bn at first, by th sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching thm, and at no grat distanc. Th walk bing hr lss
shltrd than on th othr sid, allowd thm to s him bfor thy
mt. lizabth, howvr astonishd, was at last mor prpard for an
intrviw than bfor, and rsolvd to appar and to spak with
calmnss, if h rally intndd to mt thm. For a fw momnts, indd,
sh flt that h would probably strik into som othr path. Th ida
lastd whil a turning in th walk concald him from thir viw; th
turning past, h was immdiatly bfor thm. With a glanc sh saw that
h had lost non of his rcnt civility; and, to imitat his politnss,
sh bgan as thy mt to admir th bauty of th plac; but sh had not
got byond th words “dlightful,” and “charming,” whn som unlucky
rcollctions obtrudd, and sh fancid that prais of Pmbrly from
hr might b mischivously construd. Hr colour changd, and sh said
no mor.

Mrs. Gardinr was standing a littl bhind; and on hr pausing, h askd
hr if sh would do him th honour of introducing him to hr frinds.
This was a strok of civility for which sh was quit unprpard; and
sh could hardly supprss a smil at his bing now sking th
acquaintanc of som of thos vry popl, against whom his prid had
rvoltd, in his offr to hrslf. “What will b his surpris,” thought
sh, “whn h knows who thy ar! H taks thm now for popl of
fashion.”

Th introduction, howvr, was immdiatly mad; and as sh namd thir
rlationship to hrslf, sh stol a sly look at him, to s how h bor
it; and was not without th xpctation of his dcamping as fast as h
could from such disgracful companions. That h was _surprisd_ by th
connction was vidnt: h sustaind it, howvr, with fortitud: and,
so far from going away, turnd back with thm, and ntrd into
convrsation with Mr. Gardinr. lizabth could not but b plasd,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that h should know sh had som
rlations for whom thr was no nd to blush. Sh listnd most
attntivly to all that passd btwn thm, and glorid in vry
xprssion, vry sntnc of hr uncl, which markd his intllignc,
his tast, or his good mannrs.

Th convrsation soon turnd upon fishing; and sh hard Mr. Darcy
invit him, with th gratst civility, to fish thr as oftn as h
chos, whil h continud in th nighbourhood, offring at th sam
tim to supply him with fishing tackl, and pointing out thos parts of
th stram whr thr was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardinr, who was
walking arm in arm with lizabth, gav hr a look xprssiv of hr
wondr. lizabth said nothing, but it gratifid hr xcdingly; th
complimnt must b all for hrslf. Hr astonishmnt, howvr, was
xtrm; and continually was sh rpating, “Why is h so altrd? From
what can it procd? It cannot b for _m_, it cannot b for _my_ sak
that his mannrs ar thus softnd. My rproofs at Hunsford could not
work such a chang as this. It is impossibl that h should still lov
m.”

Aftr walking som tim in this way, th two ladis in front, th two
gntlmn bhind, on rsuming thir placs, aftr dscnding to th
brink of th rivr for th bttr inspction of som curious
watr-plant, thr chancd to b a littl altration. It originatd in
Mrs. Gardinr, who, fatigud by th xrcis of th morning, found
lizabth’s arm inadquat to hr support, and consquntly prfrrd
hr husband’s. Mr. Darcy took hr plac by hr nic, and thy walkd on
togthr. Aftr a short silnc th lady first spok. Sh wishd him to
know that sh had bn assurd of his absnc bfor sh cam to th
plac, and accordingly bgan by obsrving, that his arrival had bn
vry unxpctd--“for your houskpr,” sh addd, “informd us that
you would crtainly not b hr till to-morrow; and, indd, bfor w
lft Bakwll, w undrstood that you wr not immdiatly xpctd in
th country.” H acknowldgd th truth of it all; and said that
businss with his stward had occasiond his coming forward a fw hours
bfor th rst of th party with whom h had bn travlling. “Thy
will join m arly to-morrow,” h continud, “and among thm ar som
who will claim an acquaintanc with you,--Mr. Bingly and his sistrs.”

lizabth answrd only by a slight bow. Hr thoughts wr instantly
drivn back to th tim whn Mr. Bingly’s nam had bn last mntiond
btwn thm; and if sh might judg from his complxion, _his_ mind was
not vry diffrntly ngagd.

“Thr is also on othr prson in th party,” h continud aftr a
paus, “who mor particularly wishs to b known to you. Will you allow
m, or do I ask too much, to introduc my sistr to your acquaintanc
during your stay at Lambton?”

Th surpris of such an application was grat indd; it was too grat
for hr to know in what mannr sh accdd to it. Sh immdiatly flt
that whatvr dsir Miss Darcy might hav of bing acquaintd with hr,
must b th work of hr brothr, and without looking farthr, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his rsntmnt had not mad
him think rally ill of hr.

Thy now walkd on in silnc; ach of thm dp in thought. lizabth
was not comfortabl; that was impossibl; but sh was flattrd and
plasd. His wish of introducing his sistr to hr was a complimnt of
th highst kind. Thy soon outstrippd th othrs; and whn thy had
rachd th carriag, Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr wr half a quartr of a
mil bhind.

H thn askd hr to walk into th hous--but sh dclard hrslf not
tird, and thy stood togthr on th lawn. At such a tim much might
hav bn said, and silnc was vry awkward. Sh wantd to talk, but
thr smd an mbargo on vry subjct. At last sh rcollctd that
sh had bn travlling, and thy talkd of Matlock and Dovdal with
grat prsvranc. Yt tim and hr aunt movd slowly--and hr patinc
and hr idas wr narly worn out bfor th _têt-à-têt_ was ovr.

On Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr’s coming up thy wr all prssd to go into
th hous and tak som rfrshmnt; but this was dclind, and thy
partd on ach sid with th utmost politnss. Mr. Darcy handd th
ladis into th carriag; and whn it drov off, lizabth saw him
walking slowly towards th hous.

Th obsrvations of hr uncl and aunt now bgan; and ach of thm
pronouncd him to b infinitly suprior to anything thy had xpctd.

“H is prfctly wll-bhavd, polit, and unassuming,” said hr uncl.

“Thr _is_ somthing a littl statly in him, to b sur,” rplid hr
aunt; “but it is confind to his air, and is not unbcoming. I can now
say with th houskpr, that though som popl may call him proud,
_I_ hav sn nothing of it.”

“I was nvr mor surprisd than by his bhaviour to us. It was mor
than civil; it was rally attntiv; and thr was no ncssity for such
attntion. His acquaintanc with lizabth was vry trifling.”

“To b sur, Lizzy,” said hr aunt, “h is not so handsom as Wickham;
or rathr h has not Wickham’s countnanc, for his faturs ar
prfctly good. But how cam you to tll us that h was so
disagrabl?”

lizabth xcusd hrslf as wll as sh could: said that sh had likd
him bttr whn thy mt in Knt than bfor, and that sh had nvr
sn him so plasant as this morning.

“But prhaps h may b a littl whimsical in his civilitis,” rplid
hr uncl. “Your grat mn oftn ar; and thrfor I shall not tak him
at his word about fishing, as h might chang his mind anothr day, and
warn m off his grounds.”

lizabth flt that thy had ntirly mistakn his charactr, but said
nothing.

“From what w hav sn of him,” continud Mrs. Gardinr, “I rally
should not hav thought that h could hav bhavd in so crul a way by
anybody as h has don by poor Wickham. H has not an ill-naturd look.
On th contrary, thr is somthing plasing about his mouth whn h
spaks. And thr is somthing of dignity in his countnanc, that would
not giv on an unfavourabl ida of his hart. But, to b sur, th
good lady who showd us th hous did giv him a most flaming charactr!
I could hardly hlp laughing aloud somtims. But h is a libral
mastr, I suppos, and _that_, in th y of a srvant, comprhnds
vry virtu.”

lizabth hr flt hrslf calld on to say somthing in vindication of
his bhaviour to Wickham; and, thrfor, gav thm to undrstand, in as
guardd a mannr as sh could, that by what sh had hard from his
rlations in Knt, his actions wr capabl of a vry diffrnt
construction; and that his charactr was by no mans so faulty, nor
Wickham’s so amiabl, as thy had bn considrd in Hrtfordshir. In
confirmation of this, sh rlatd th particulars of all th pcuniary
transactions in which thy had bn connctd, without actually naming
hr authority, but stating it to b such as might b rlid on.

Mrs. Gardinr was surprisd and concrnd: but as thy wr now
approaching th scn of hr formr plasurs, vry ida gav way to
th charm of rcollction; and sh was too much ngagd in pointing out
to hr husband all th intrsting spots in its nvirons, to think of
anything ls. Fatigud as sh had bn by th morning’s walk, thy had
no soonr dind than sh st off again in qust of hr formr
acquaintanc, and th vning was spnt in th satisfactions of an
intrcours rnwd aftr many yars’ discontinuanc.

Th occurrncs of th day wr too full of intrst to lav lizabth
much attntion for any of ths nw frinds; and sh could do nothing
but think, and think with wondr, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, abov
all, of his wishing hr to b acquaintd with his sistr.

lizabth had sttld it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sistr to visit
hr th vry day aftr hr raching Pmbrly; and was, consquntly,
rsolvd not to b out of sight of th inn th whol of that morning.
But hr conclusion was fals; for on th vry morning aftr thir own
arrival at Lambton ths visitors cam. Thy had bn walking about th
plac with som of thir nw frinds, and wr just rturnd to th inn
to drss thmslvs for dining with th sam family, whn th sound of a
carriag drw thm to a window, and thy saw a gntlman and lady in a
curricl driving up th strt. lizabth, immdiatly rcognizing th
livry, gussd what it mant, and impartd no small dgr of surpris
to hr rlations, by acquainting thm with th honour which sh
xpctd. Hr uncl and aunt wr all amazmnt; and th mbarrassmnt
of hr mannr as sh spok, joind to th circumstanc itslf, and many
of th circumstancs of th prcding day, opnd to thm a nw ida on
th businss. Nothing had vr suggstd it bfor, but thy now flt
that thr was no othr way of accounting for such attntions from such
a quartr than by supposing a partiality for thir nic. Whil ths
nwly-born notions wr passing in thir hads, th prturbation of
lizabth’s flings was vry momnt incrasing. Sh was quit amazd
at hr own discomposur; but, amongst othr causs of disquit, sh
dradd lst th partiality of th brothr should hav said too much in
hr favour; and, mor than commonly anxious to plas, sh naturally
suspctd that vry powr of plasing would fail hr.

Sh rtratd from th window, farful of bing sn; and as sh walkd
up and down th room, ndavouring to compos hrslf, saw such looks of
inquiring surpris in hr uncl and aunt as mad vrything wors.

Miss Darcy and hr brothr appard, and this formidabl introduction
took plac. With astonishmnt did lizabth s that hr nw
acquaintanc was at last as much mbarrassd as hrslf. Sinc hr
bing at Lambton, sh had hard that Miss Darcy was xcdingly proud;
but th obsrvation of a vry fw minuts convincd hr that sh was
only xcdingly shy. Sh found it difficult to obtain vn a word from
hr byond a monosyllabl.

Miss Darcy was tall, and on a largr scal than lizabth; and, though
littl mor than sixtn, hr figur was formd, and hr apparanc
womanly and gracful. Sh was lss handsom than hr brothr, but thr
was sns and good-humour in hr fac, and hr mannrs wr prfctly
unassuming and gntl. lizabth, who had xpctd to find in hr as
acut and unmbarrassd an obsrvr as vr Mr. Darcy had bn, was much
rlivd by discrning such diffrnt flings.

Thy had not bn long togthr bfor Darcy told hr that Bingly was
also coming to wait on hr; and sh had barly tim to xprss hr
satisfaction, and prpar for such a visitor, whn Bingly’s quick stp
was hard on th stairs, and in a momnt h ntrd th room. All
lizabth’s angr against him had bn long don away; but had sh still
flt any, it could hardly hav stood its ground against th unaffctd
cordiality with which h xprssd himslf on sing hr again. H
inquird in a frindly, though gnral, way, aftr hr family, and
lookd and spok with th sam good-humourd as that h had vr don.

To Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr h was scarcly a lss intrsting prsonag
than to hrslf. Thy had long wishd to s him. Th whol party bfor
thm, indd, xcitd a livly attntion. Th suspicions which had just
arisn of Mr. Darcy and thir nic, dirctd thir obsrvation towards
ach with an arnst, though guardd, inquiry; and thy soon drw from
thos inquiris th full conviction that on of thm at last knw what
it was to lov. Of th lady’s snsations thy rmaind a littl in
doubt; but that th gntlman was ovrflowing with admiration was
vidnt nough.

lizabth, on hr sid, had much to do. Sh wantd to ascrtain th
flings of ach of hr visitors, sh wantd to compos hr own, and to
mak hrslf agrabl to all; and in th lattr objct, whr sh
fard most to fail, sh was most sur of succss, for thos to whom
sh ndavourd to giv plasur wr pr-possssd in hr favour.
Bingly was rady, Gorgiana was agr, and Darcy dtrmind, to b
plasd.

In sing Bingly, hr thoughts naturally flw to hr sistr; and oh!
how ardntly did sh long to know whthr any of his wr dirctd in a
lik mannr. Somtims sh could fancy that h talkd lss than on
formr occasions, and onc or twic plasd hrslf with th notion
that, as h lookd at hr, h was trying to trac a rsmblanc. But,
though this might b imaginary, sh could not b dcivd as to his
bhaviour to Miss Darcy, who had bn st up as a rival to Jan. No
look appard on ithr sid that spok particular rgard. Nothing
occurrd btwn thm that could justify th hops of his sistr. On
this point sh was soon satisfid; and two or thr littl circumstancs
occurrd r thy partd, which, in hr anxious intrprtation, dnotd
a rcollction of Jan, not untincturd by tndrnss, and a wish of
saying mor that might lad to th mntion of hr, had h dard. H
obsrvd to hr, at a momnt whn th othrs wr talking togthr, and
in a ton which had somthing of ral rgrt, that it “was a vry long
tim sinc h had had th plasur of sing hr;” and, bfor sh could
rply, h addd, “It is abov ight months. W hav not mt sinc th
26th of Novmbr, whn w wr all dancing togthr at Nthrfild.”

lizabth was plasd to find his mmory so xact; and h aftrwards
took occasion to ask hr, whn unattndd to by any of th rst, whthr
_all_ hr sistrs wr at Longbourn. Thr was not much in th qustion,
nor in th prcding rmark; but thr was a look and a mannr which
gav thm maning.

It was not oftn that sh could turn hr ys on Mr. Darcy himslf; but
whnvr sh did catch a glimps sh saw an xprssion of gnral
complaisanc, and in all that h said, sh hard an accnt so far
rmovd from _hautur_ or disdain of his companions, as convincd hr
that th improvmnt of mannrs which sh had ystrday witnssd,
howvr tmporary its xistnc might prov, had at last outlivd on
day. Whn sh saw him thus sking th acquaintanc, and courting th
good opinion of popl with whom any intrcours a fw months ago would
hav bn a disgrac; whn sh saw him thus civil, not only to hrslf,
but to th vry rlations whom h had opnly disdaind, and rcollctd
thir last livly scn in Hunsford Parsonag, th diffrnc, th
chang was so grat, and struck so forcibly on hr mind, that sh could
hardly rstrain hr astonishmnt from bing visibl. Nvr, vn in th
company of his dar frinds at Nthrfild, or his dignifid rlations
at Rosings, had sh sn him so dsirous to plas, so fr from
slf-consqunc or unbnding rsrv, as now, whn no importanc could
rsult from th succss of his ndavours, and whn vn th
acquaintanc of thos to whom his attntions wr addrssd, would draw
down th ridicul and cnsur of th ladis both of Nthrfild and
Rosings.

Thir visitors stayd with thm abov half an hour; and whn thy aros
to dpart, Mr. Darcy calld on his sistr to join him in xprssing
thir wish of sing Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr, and Miss Bnnt, to dinnr
at Pmbrly, bfor thy lft th country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidnc which markd hr littl in th habit of giving invitations,
radily obyd. Mrs. Gardinr lookd at hr nic, dsirous of knowing
how _sh_, whom th invitation most concrnd, flt disposd as to its
accptanc, but lizabth had turnd away hr had. Prsuming, howvr,
that this studid avoidanc spok rathr a momntary mbarrassmnt than
any dislik of th proposal, and sing in hr husband, who was fond of
socity, a prfct willingnss to accpt it, sh vnturd to ngag for
hr attndanc, and th day aftr th nxt was fixd on.

Bingly xprssd grat plasur in th crtainty of sing lizabth
again, having still a grat dal to say to hr, and many inquiris to
mak aftr all thir Hrtfordshir frinds. lizabth, construing all
this into a wish of haring hr spak of hr sistr, was plasd; and
on this account, as wll as som othrs, found hrslf, whn thir
visitors lft thm, capabl of considring th last half hour with som
satisfaction, though whil it was passing th njoymnt of it had bn
littl. agr to b alon, and farful of inquiris or hints from hr
uncl and aunt, sh stayd with thm only long nough to har thir
favourabl opinion of Bingly, and thn hurrid away to drss.

But sh had no rason to far Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr’s curiosity; it was
not thir wish to forc hr communication. It was vidnt that sh was
much bttr acquaintd with Mr. Darcy than thy had bfor any ida of;
it was vidnt that h was vry much in lov with hr. Thy saw much to
intrst, but nothing to justify inquiry.

Of Mr. Darcy it was now a mattr of anxity to think wll; and, as far
as thir acquaintanc rachd, thr was no fault to find. Thy could
not b untouchd by his politnss; and had thy drawn his charactr
from thir own flings and his srvant’s rport, without any rfrnc
to any othr account, th circl in Hrtfordshir to which h was known
would not hav rcognizd it for Mr. Darcy. Thr was now an intrst,
howvr, in bliving th houskpr; and thy soon bcam snsibl
that th authority of a srvant, who had known him sinc h was four
yars old, and whos own mannrs indicatd rspctability, was not to b
hastily rjctd. Nithr had anything occurrd in th intllignc of
thir Lambton frinds that could matrially lssn its wight. Thy had
nothing to accus him of but prid; prid h probably had, and if not,
it would crtainly b imputd by th inhabitants of a small markt town
whr th family did not visit. It was acknowldgd, howvr, that h
was a libral man, and did much good among th poor.

With rspct to Wickham, th travllrs soon found that h was not hld
thr in much stimation; for though th chif of his concrns with th
son of his patron wr imprfctly undrstood, it was yt a wll-known
fact that, on his quitting Drbyshir, h had lft many dbts bhind
him, which Mr. Darcy aftrwards dischargd.

As for lizabth, hr thoughts wr at Pmbrly this vning mor than
th last; and th vning, though as it passd it smd long, was not
long nough to dtrmin hr flings towards _on_ in that mansion; and
sh lay awak two whol hours, ndavouring to mak thm out. Sh
crtainly did not hat him. No; hatrd had vanishd long ago, and sh
had almost as long bn ashamd of vr fling a dislik against him,
that could b so calld. Th rspct cratd by th conviction of his
valuabl qualitis, though at first unwillingly admittd, had for som
tim casd to b rpugnant to hr flings; and it was now hightnd
into somwhat of a frindlir natur by th tstimony so highly in his
favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiabl a light,
which ystrday had producd. But abov all, abov rspct and stm,
thr was a motiv within hr of good-will which could not b
ovrlookd. It was gratitud;--gratitud, not mrly for having onc
lovd hr, but for loving hr still wll nough to forgiv all th
ptulanc and acrimony of hr mannr in rjcting him, and all th
unjust accusations accompanying hr rjction. H who, sh had bn
prsuadd, would avoid hr as his gratst nmy, smd, on this
accidntal mting, most agr to prsrv th acquaintanc; and
without any indlicat display of rgard, or any pculiarity of mannr,
whr thir two slvs only wr concrnd, was soliciting th good
opinion of hr frinds, and bnt on making hr known to his sistr. Such
a chang in a man of so much prid xcitd not only astonishmnt but
gratitud--for to lov, ardnt lov, it must b attributd; and, as
such, its imprssion on hr was of a sort to b ncouragd, as by no
mans unplasing, though it could not b xactly dfind. Sh rspctd,
sh stmd, sh was gratful to him, sh flt a ral intrst in his
wlfar; and sh only wantd to know how far sh wishd that wlfar to
dpnd upon hrslf, and how far it would b for th happinss of both
that sh should mploy th powr, which hr fancy told hr sh still
possssd, of bringing on th rnwal of his addrsss.

It had bn sttld in th vning, btwn th aunt and nic, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to thm on th vry
day of hr arrival at Pmbrly--for sh had rachd it only to a lat
brakfast--ought to b imitatd, though it could not b qualld, by
som xrtion of politnss on thir sid; and, consquntly, that it
would b highly xpdint to wait on hr at Pmbrly th following
morning. Thy wr, thrfor, to go. lizabth was plasd; though whn
sh askd hrslf th rason, sh had vry littl to say in rply.

Mr. Gardinr lft thm soon aftr brakfast. Th fishing schm had bn
rnwd th day bfor, and a positiv ngagmnt mad of his mting
som of th gntlmn at Pmbrly by noon.

Convincd as lizabth now was that Miss Bingly’s dislik of hr had
originatd in jalousy, sh could not hlp fling how vry unwlcom
hr apparanc at Pmbrly must b to hr, and was curious to know
with how much civility on that lady’s sid th acquaintanc would now
b rnwd.

On raching th hous, thy wr shown through th hall into th saloon,
whos northrn aspct rndrd it dlightful for summr. Its windows,
opning to th ground, admittd a most rfrshing viw of th high woody
hills bhind th hous, and of th bautiful oaks and Spanish chstnuts
which wr scattrd ovr th intrmdiat lawn.

In this room thy wr rcivd by Miss Darcy, who was sitting thr
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingly, and th lady with whom sh livd in
London. Gorgiana’s rcption of thm was vry civil, but attndd with
all that mbarrassmnt which, though procding from shynss and th
far of doing wrong, would asily giv to thos who flt thmslvs
infrior th blif of hr bing proud and rsrvd. Mrs. Gardinr and
hr nic, howvr, did hr justic, and pitid hr.

By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingly thy wr noticd only by a courtsy; and
on thir bing satd, a paus, awkward as such pauss must always b,
succdd for a fw momnts. It was first brokn by Mrs. Annsly, a
gntl, agrabl-looking woman, whos ndavour to introduc som kind
of discours provd hr to b mor truly wll-brd than ithr of th
othrs; and btwn hr and Mrs. Gardinr, with occasional hlp from
lizabth, th convrsation was carrid on. Miss Darcy lookd as if sh
wishd for courag nough to join in it; and somtims did vntur a
short sntnc, whn thr was last dangr of its bing hard.

lizabth soon saw that sh was hrslf closly watchd by Miss Bingly,
and that sh could not spak a word, spcially to Miss Darcy, without
calling hr attntion. This obsrvation would not hav prvntd hr
from trying to talk to th lattr, had thy not bn satd at an
inconvnint distanc; but sh was not sorry to b spard th ncssity
of saying much: hr own thoughts wr mploying hr. Sh xpctd vry
momnt that som of th gntlmn would ntr th room: sh wishd, sh
fard, that th mastr of th hous might b amongst thm; and whthr
sh wishd or fard it most, sh could scarcly dtrmin. Aftr
sitting in this mannr a quartr of an hour, without haring Miss
Bingly’s voic, lizabth was rousd by rciving from hr a cold
inquiry aftr th halth of hr family. Sh answrd with qual
indiffrnc and brvity, and th othr said no mor.

Th nxt variation which thir visit affordd was producd by th
ntranc of srvants with cold mat, cak, and a varity of all th
finst fruits in sason; but this did not tak plac till aftr many a
significant look and smil from Mrs. Annsly to Miss Darcy had bn
givn, to rmind hr of hr post. Thr was now mploymnt for th whol
party; for though thy could not all talk, thy could all at; and th
bautiful pyramids of graps, nctarins, and pachs, soon collctd
thm round th tabl.

Whil thus ngagd, lizabth had a fair opportunity of dciding whthr
sh most fard or wishd for th apparanc of Mr. Darcy, by th
flings which prvaild on his ntring th room; and thn, though but
a momnt bfor sh had blivd hr wishs to prdominat, sh bgan to
rgrt that h cam.

H had bn som tim with Mr. Gardinr, who, with two or thr othr
gntlmn from th hous, was ngagd by th rivr; and had lft him
only on larning that th ladis of th family intndd a visit to
Gorgiana that morning. No soonr did h appar, than lizabth wisly
rsolvd to b prfctly asy and unmbarrassd;--a rsolution th mor
ncssary to b mad, but prhaps not th mor asily kpt, bcaus sh
saw that th suspicions of th whol party wr awaknd against thm,
and that thr was scarcly an y which did not watch his bhaviour
whn h first cam into th room. In no countnanc was attntiv
curiosity so strongly markd as in Miss Bingly’s, in spit of th
smils which ovrsprad hr fac whnvr sh spok to on of its
objcts; for jalousy had not yt mad hr dsprat, and hr attntions
to Mr. Darcy wr by no mans ovr. Miss Darcy, on hr brothr’s
ntranc, xrtd hrslf much mor to talk; and lizabth saw that h
was anxious for his sistr and hrslf to gt acquaintd, and forwardd,
as much as possibl, vry attmpt at convrsation on ithr sid. Miss
Bingly saw all this likwis; and, in th imprudnc of angr, took th
first opportunity of saying, with snring civility,--

“Pray, Miss liza, ar not th ----shir militia rmovd from Mryton?
Thy must b a grat loss to _your_ family.”

In Darcy’s prsnc sh dard not mntion Wickham’s nam: but lizabth
instantly comprhndd that h was upprmost in hr thoughts; and th
various rcollctions connctd with him gav hr a momnt’s distrss;
but, xrting hrslf vigorously to rpl th ill-naturd attack, sh
prsntly answrd th qustion in a tolrably disngagd ton. Whil
sh spok, an involuntary glanc showd hr Darcy with a hightnd
complxion, arnstly looking at hr, and his sistr ovrcom with
confusion, and unabl to lift up hr ys. Had Miss Bingly known what
pain sh was thn giving hr blovd frind, sh undoubtdly would hav
rfraind from th hint; but sh had mrly intndd to discompos
lizabth, by bringing forward th ida of a man to whom sh blivd
hr partial, to mak hr btray a snsibility which might injur hr in
Darcy’s opinion, and, prhaps, to rmind th lattr of all th follis
and absurditis by which som part of hr family wr connctd with
that corps. Not a syllabl had vr rachd hr of Miss Darcy’s
mditatd lopmnt. To no cratur had it bn rvald, whr scrcy
was possibl, xcpt to lizabth; and from all Bingly’s connctions
hr brothr was particularly anxious to concal it, from that vry wish
which lizabth had long ago attributd to him, of thir bcoming
hraftr hr own. H had crtainly formd such a plan; and without
maning that it should affct his ndavour to sparat him from Miss
Bnnt, it is probabl that it might add somthing to his livly concrn
for th wlfar of his frind.

lizabth’s collctd bhaviour, howvr, soon quitd his motion; and
as Miss Bingly, vxd and disappointd, dard not approach narr to
Wickham, Gorgiana also rcovrd in tim, though not nough to b abl
to spak any mor. Hr brothr, whos y sh fard to mt, scarcly
rcollctd hr intrst in th affair; and th vry circumstanc which
had bn dsignd to turn his thoughts from lizabth, smd to hav
fixd thm on hr mor and mor chrfully.

Thir visit did not continu long aftr th qustion and answr abov
mntiond; and whil Mr. Darcy was attnding thm to thir carriag,
Miss Bingly was vnting hr flings in criticisms on lizabth’s
prson, bhaviour, and drss. But Gorgiana would not join hr. Hr
brothr’s rcommndation was nough to insur hr favour: his judgmnt
could not rr; and h had spokn in such trms of lizabth, as to lav
Gorgiana without th powr of finding hr othrwis than lovly and
amiabl. Whn Darcy rturnd to th saloon, Miss Bingly could not hlp
rpating to him som part of what sh had bn saying to his sistr.

“How vry ill liza Bnnt looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” sh crid: “I
nvr in my lif saw anyon so much altrd as sh is sinc th wintr.
Sh is grown so brown and coars! Louisa and I wr agring that w
should not hav known hr again.”

Howvr littl Mr. Darcy might hav likd such an addrss, h contntd
himslf with coolly rplying, that h prcivd no othr altration than
hr bing rathr tannd,--no miraculous consqunc of travlling in th
summr.

“For my own part,” sh rjoind, “I must confss that I nvr could s
any bauty in hr. Hr fac is too thin; hr complxion has no
brilliancy; and hr faturs ar not at all handsom. Hr nos wants
charactr; thr is nothing markd in its lins. Hr tth ar
tolrabl, but not out of th common way; and as for hr ys, which
hav somtims bn calld so fin, I nvr could prciv anything
xtraordinary in thm. Thy hav a sharp, shrwish look, which I do not
lik at all; and in hr air altogthr, thr is a slf-sufficincy
without fashion, which is intolrabl.”

Prsuadd as Miss Bingly was that Darcy admird lizabth, this was not
th bst mthod of rcommnding hrslf; but angry popl ar not always
wis; and in sing him at last look somwhat nttld, sh had all th
succss sh xpctd. H was rsolutly silnt, howvr; and, from a
dtrmination of making him spak, sh continud,--

“I rmmbr, whn w first knw hr in Hrtfordshir, how amazd w all
wr to find that sh was a rputd bauty; and I particularly rcollct
your saying on night, aftr thy had bn dining at Nthrfild, ‘_Sh_
a bauty! I should as soon call hr mothr a wit.’ But aftrwards sh
smd to improv on you, and I bliv you thought hr rathr prtty at
on tim.”

“Ys,” rplid Darcy, who could contain himslf no longr, “but _that_
was only whn I first knw hr; for it is many months sinc I hav
considrd hr as on of th handsomst womn of my acquaintanc.”

H thn wnt away, and Miss Bingly was lft to all th satisfaction of
having forcd him to say what gav no on any pain but hrslf.

Mrs. Gardinr and lizabth talkd of all that had occurrd during thir
visit, as thy rturnd, xcpt what had particularly intrstd thm
both. Th looks and bhaviour of vrybody thy had sn wr discussd,
xcpt of th prson who had mostly ngagd thir attntion. Thy talkd
of his sistr, his frinds, his hous, his fruit, of vrything but
himslf; yt lizabth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardinr thought of
him, and Mrs. Gardinr would hav bn highly gratifid by hr nic’s
bginning th subjct.

lizabth had bn a good dal disappointd in not finding a lttr from
Jan on thir first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointmnt had bn
rnwd on ach of th mornings that had now bn spnt thr; but on
th third hr rpining was ovr, and hr sistr justifid, by th
rcipt of two lttrs from hr at onc, on on of which was markd that
it had bn mis-snt lswhr. lizabth was not surprisd at it, as
Jan had writtn th dirction rmarkably ill.

Thy had just bn prparing to walk as th lttrs cam in; and hr
uncl and aunt, laving hr to njoy thm in quit, st off by
thmslvs. Th on mis-snt must b first attndd to; it had bn
writtn fiv days ago. Th bginning containd an account of all thir
littl partis and ngagmnts, with such nws as th country affordd;
but th lattr half, which was datd a day latr, and writtn in vidnt
agitation, gav mor important intllignc. It was to this ffct:--

“Sinc writing th abov, darst Lizzy, somthing has occurrd of a
most unxpctd and srious natur; but I am afraid of alarming you--b
assurd that w ar all wll. What I hav to say rlats to poor Lydia.
An xprss cam at twlv last night, just as w wr all gon to bd,
from Colonl Forstr, to inform us that sh was gon off to Scotland
with on of his officrs; to own th truth, with Wickham! Imagin our
surpris. To Kitty, howvr, it dos not sm so wholly unxpctd. I am
vry, vry sorry. So imprudnt a match on both sids! But I am willing
to hop th bst, and that his charactr has bn misundrstood.
Thoughtlss and indiscrt I can asily bliv him, but this stp (and
lt us rjoic ovr it) marks nothing bad at hart. His choic is
disintrstd at last, for h must know my fathr can giv hr nothing.
Our poor mothr is sadly grivd. My fathr bars it bttr. How
thankful am I, that w nvr lt thm know what has bn said against
him; w must forgt it ourslvs. Thy wr off Saturday night about
twlv, as is conjcturd, but wr not missd till ystrday morning at
ight. Th xprss was snt off dirctly. My dar Lizzy, thy must hav
passd within tn mils of us. Colonl Forstr givs us rason to xpct
him hr soon. Lydia lft a fw lins for his wif, informing hr of
thir intntion. I must conclud, for I cannot b long from my poor
mothr. I am afraid you will not b abl to mak it out, but I hardly
know what I hav writtn.”

Without allowing hrslf tim for considration, and scarcly knowing
what sh flt, lizabth, on finishing this lttr, instantly sizd th
othr, and opning it with th utmost impatinc, rad as follows: it
had bn writtn a day latr than th conclusion of th first.

“By this tim, my darst sistr, you hav rcivd my hurrid lttr; I
wish this may b mor intlligibl, but though not confind for tim, my
had is so bwildrd that I cannot answr for bing cohrnt. Darst
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would writ, but I hav bad nws for you,
and it cannot b dlayd. Imprudnt as a marriag btwn Mr. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would b, w ar now anxious to b assurd it has
takn plac, for thr is but too much rason to far thy ar not gon
to Scotland. Colonl Forstr cam ystrday, having lft Brighton th
day bfor, not many hours aftr th xprss. Though Lydia’s short
lttr to Mrs. F. gav thm to undrstand that thy wr going to Grtna
Grn, somthing was droppd by Dnny xprssing his blif that W.
nvr intndd to go thr, or to marry Lydia at all, which was rpatd
to Colonl F., who, instantly taking th alarm, st off from B.,
intnding to trac thir rout. H did trac thm asily to Clapham, but
no farthr; for on ntring that plac, thy rmovd into a
hackny-coach, and dismissd th chais that brought thm from psom.
All that is known aftr this is, that thy wr sn to continu th
London road. I know not what to think. Aftr making vry possibl
inquiry on that sid London, Colonl F. cam on into Hrtfordshir,
anxiously rnwing thm at all th turnpiks, and at th inns in Barnt
and Hatfild, but without any succss,--no such popl had bn sn to
pass through. With th kindst concrn h cam on to Longbourn, and
brok his apprhnsions to us in a mannr most crditabl to his hart.
I am sincrly grivd for him and Mrs. F.; but no on can throw any
blam on thm. Our distrss, my dar Lizzy, is vry grat. My fathr and
mothr bliv th worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many
circumstancs might mak it mor ligibl for thm to b marrid
privatly in town than to pursu thir first plan; and vn if _h_
could form such a dsign against a young woman of Lydia’s connctions,
which is not likly, can I suppos hr so lost to vrything?
Impossibl! I griv to find, howvr, that Colonl F. is not disposd
to dpnd upon thir marriag: h shook his had whn I xprssd my
hops, and said h fard W. was not a man to b trustd. My poor mothr
is rally ill, and kps hr room. Could sh xrt hrslf, it would b
bttr, but this is not to b xpctd; and as to my fathr, I nvr in
my lif saw him so affctd. Poor Kitty has angr for having concald
thir attachmnt; but as it was a mattr of confidnc, on cannot
wondr. I am truly glad, darst Lizzy, that you hav bn spard
somthing of ths distrssing scns; but now, as th first shock is
ovr, shall I own that I long for your rturn? I am not so slfish,
howvr, as to prss for it, if inconvnint. Adiu! I tak up my pn
again to do, what I hav just told you I would not; but circumstancs
ar such, that I cannot hlp arnstly bgging you all to com hr as
soon as possibl. I know my dar uncl and aunt so wll, that I am not
afraid of rqusting it, though I hav still somthing mor to ask of
th formr. My fathr is going to London with Colonl Forstr instantly,
to try to discovr hr. What h mans to do, I am sur I know not; but
his xcssiv distrss will not allow him to pursu any masur in th
bst and safst way, and Colonl Forstr is obligd to b at Brighton
again to-morrow vning. In such an xignc my uncl’s advic and
assistanc would b vrything in th world; h will immdiatly
comprhnd what I must fl, and I rly upon his goodnss.”

“Oh! whr, whr is my uncl?” crid lizabth, darting from hr sat
as sh finishd th lttr, in agrnss to follow him, without losing a
momnt of th tim so prcious; but as sh rachd th door, it was
opnd by a srvant, and Mr. Darcy appard. Hr pal fac and
imptuous mannr mad him start, and bfor h could rcovr himslf
nough to spak, sh, in whos mind vry ida was suprsdd by Lydia’s
situation, hastily xclaimd, “I bg your pardon, but I must lav you.
I must find Mr. Gardinr this momnt on businss that cannot b dlayd;
I hav not an instant to los.”

“Good God! what is th mattr?” crid h, with mor fling than
politnss; thn rcollcting himslf, “I will not dtain you a minut;
but lt m, or lt th srvant, go aftr Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr. You ar
not wll nough; you cannot go yourslf.”

lizabth hsitatd; but hr kns trmbld undr hr, and sh flt how
littl would b gaind by hr attmpting to pursu thm. Calling back
th srvant, thrfor, sh commissiond him, though in so brathlss an
accnt as mad hr almost unintlligibl, to ftch his mastr and
mistrss hom instantly.

On his quitting th room, sh sat down, unabl to support hrslf, and
looking so misrably ill, that it was impossibl for Darcy to lav hr,
or to rfrain from saying, in a ton of gntlnss and commisration,
“Lt m call your maid. Is thr nothing you could tak to giv you
prsnt rlif? A glass of win; shall I gt you on? You ar vry ill.”

“No, I thank you,” sh rplid, ndavouring to rcovr hrslf. “Thr
is nothing th mattr with m. I am quit wll, I am only distrssd by
som dradful nws which I hav just rcivd from Longbourn.”

Sh burst into tars as sh alludd to it, and for a fw minuts could
not spak anothr word. Darcy, in wrtchd suspns, could only say
somthing indistinctly of his

concrn, and obsrv hr in compassionat silnc. At lngth sh spok
again. “I hav just had a lttr from Jan, with such dradful nws. It
cannot b concald from anyon. My youngst sistr has lft all hr
frinds--has lopd; has thrown hrslf into th powr of--of Mr.
Wickham. Thy ar gon off togthr from Brighton. _You_ know him too
wll to doubt th rst. Sh has no mony, no connctions, nothing that
can tmpt him to--sh is lost for vr.”

Darcy was fixd in astonishmnt.

“Whn I considr,” sh addd, in a yt mor agitatd voic, “that _I_
might hav prvntd it! _I_ who knw what h was. Had I but xplaind
som part of it only--som part of what I larnt, to my own family! Had
his charactr bn known, this could not hav happnd. But it is all,
all too lat now.”

“I am grivd, indd,” crid Darcy: “grivd--shockd. But is it
crtain, absolutly crtain?”

“Oh, ys! Thy lft Brighton togthr on Sunday night, and wr tracd
almost to London, but not byond: thy ar crtainly not gon to
Scotland.”

“And what has bn don, what has bn attmptd, to rcovr hr?”

“My fathr has gon to London, and Jan has writtn to bg my uncl’s
immdiat assistanc, and w shall b off, I hop, in half an hour. But
nothing can b don; I know vry wll that nothing can b don. How is
such a man to b workd on? How ar thy vn to b discovrd? I hav
not th smallst hop. It is vry way horribl!”

Darcy shook his had in silnt acquiscnc.

“Whn _my_ ys wr opnd to his ral charactr, oh! had I known what
I ought, what I dard to do! But I knw not--I was afraid of doing too
much. Wrtchd, wrtchd mistak!”

Darcy mad no answr. H smd scarcly to har hr, and was walking up
and down th room in arnst mditation; his brow contractd, his air
gloomy. lizabth soon obsrvd, and instantly undrstood it. Hr powr
was sinking; vrything _must_ sink undr such a proof of family
waknss, such an assuranc of th dpst disgrac. Sh could nithr
wondr nor condmn; but th blif of his slf-conqust brought nothing
consolatory to hr bosom, affordd no palliation of hr distrss. It
was, on th contrary, xactly calculatd to mak hr undrstand hr own
wishs; and nvr had sh so honstly flt that sh could hav lovd
him, as now, whn all lov must b vain.

But slf, though it would intrud, could not ngross hr. Lydia--th
humiliation, th misry sh was bringing on thm all--soon swallowd up
vry privat car; and covring hr fac with hr handkrchif,
lizabth was soon lost to vrything ls; and, aftr a paus of
svral minuts, was only rcalld to a sns of hr situation by th
voic of hr companion, who, in a mannr which, though it spok
compassion, spok likwis rstraint, said,--

“I am afraid you hav bn long dsiring my absnc, nor hav I anything
to plad in xcus of my stay, but ral, though unavailing concrn.
Would to Havn that anything could b ithr said or don on my part,
that might offr consolation to such distrss! But I will not tormnt
you with vain wishs, which may sm purposly to ask for your thanks.
This unfortunat affair will, I far, prvnt my sistr’s having th
plasur of sing you at Pmbrly to-day.”

“Oh, ys! B so kind as to apologiz for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgnt businss calls us hom immdiatly. Concal th unhappy truth as
long as it is possibl. I know it cannot b long.”

H radily assurd hr of his scrcy, again xprssd his sorrow for
hr distrss, wishd it a happir conclusion than thr was at prsnt
rason to hop, and, laving his complimnts for hr rlations, with
only on srious parting look, wnt away.

As h quittd th room, lizabth flt how improbabl it was that thy
should vr s ach othr again on such trms of cordiality as had
markd thir svral mtings in Drbyshir; and as sh thrw a
rtrospctiv glanc ovr th whol of thir acquaintanc, so full of
contradictions and varitis, sighd at th prvrsnss of thos
flings which would now hav promotd its continuanc, and would
formrly hav rjoicd in its trmination.

If gratitud and stm ar good foundations of affction, lizabth’s
chang of sntimnt will b nithr improbabl nor faulty. But if
othrwis, if th rgard springing from such sourcs is unrasonabl or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so oftn dscribd as arising on a
first intrviw with its objct, and vn bfor two words hav bn
xchangd, nothing can b said in hr dfnc, xcpt that sh had givn
somwhat of a trial to th lattr mthod, in hr partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill succss might, prhaps, authoriz hr to sk th othr
lss intrsting mod of attachmnt. B that as it may, sh saw him go
with rgrt; and in this arly xampl of what Lydia’s infamy must
produc, found additional anguish as sh rflctd on that wrtchd
businss. Nvr sinc rading Jan’s scond lttr had sh ntrtaind a
hop of Wickham’s maning to marry hr. No on but Jan, sh thought,
could flattr hrslf with such an xpctation. Surpris was th last
of all hr flings on this dvlopmnt. Whil th contnts of th first
lttr rmaind on hr mind, sh was all surpris, all astonishmnt,
that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossibl h could marry
for mony; and how Lydia could vr hav attachd him had appard
incomprhnsibl. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachmnt
as this, sh might hav sufficint charms; and though sh did not
suppos Lydia to b dlibratly ngaging in an lopmnt, without th
intntion of marriag, sh had no difficulty in bliving that nithr
hr virtu nor hr undrstanding would prsrv hr from falling an asy
pry.

Sh had nvr prcivd, whil th rgimnt was in Hrtfordshir, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but sh was convincd that Lydia had
wantd only ncouragmnt to attach hrslf to anybody. Somtims on
officr, somtims anothr, had bn hr favourit, as thir attntions
raisd thm in hr opinion. Hr affctions had bn continually
fluctuating, but nvr without an objct. Th mischif of nglct and
mistakn indulgnc towards such a girl--oh! how acutly did sh now
fl it!

Sh was wild to b at hom--to har, to s, to b upon th spot to
shar with Jan in th cars that must now fall wholly upon hr, in a
family so drangd; a fathr absnt, a mothr incapabl of xrtion, and
rquiring constant attndanc; and though almost prsuadd that nothing
could b don for Lydia, hr uncl’s intrfrnc smd of th utmost
importanc, and till h ntrd th room th misry of hr impatinc
was svr. Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr had hurrid back in alarm, supposing,
by th srvant’s account, that thir nic was takn suddnly ill; but
satisfying thm instantly on that had, sh agrly communicatd th
caus of thir summons, rading th two lttrs aloud, and dwlling on
th postscript of th last with trmbling nrgy. Though Lydia had nvr
bn a favourit with thm, Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr could not but b
dply affctd. Not Lydia only, but all wr concrnd in it; and aftr
th first xclamations of surpris and horror, Mr. Gardinr radily
promisd vry assistanc in his powr. lizabth, though xpcting no
lss, thankd him with tars of gratitud; and all thr bing actuatd
by on spirit, vrything rlating to thir journy was spdily
sttld. Thy wr to b off as soon as possibl. “But what is to b
don about Pmbrly?” crid Mrs. Gardinr. “John told us Mr. Darcy was
hr whn you snt for us;--was it so?”

“Ys; and I told him w should not b abl to kp our ngagmnt.
_That_ is all sttld.”

“What is all sttld?” rpatd th othr, as sh ran into hr room to
prpar. “And ar thy upon such trms as for hr to disclos th ral
truth? Oh, that I knw how it was!”

But wishs wr vain; or, at bst, could srv only to amus hr in th
hurry and confusion of th following hour. Had lizabth bn at lisur
to b idl, sh would hav rmaind crtain that all mploymnt was
impossibl to on so wrtchd as hrslf; but sh had hr shar of
businss as wll as hr aunt, and amongst th rst thr wr nots to
b writtn to all thir frinds at Lambton, with fals xcuss for thir
suddn dpartur. An hour, howvr, saw th whol compltd; and Mr.
Gardinr, manwhil, having sttld his account at th inn, nothing
rmaind to b don but to go; and lizabth, aftr all th misry of
th morning, found hrslf, in a shortr spac of tim than sh could
hav supposd, satd in th carriag, and on th road to Longbourn.

“I hav bn thinking it ovr again, lizabth,” said hr uncl, as thy
drov from th town; “and rally, upon srious considration, I am much
mor inclind than I was to judg as your ldst sistr dos of th
mattr. It appars to m so vry unlikly that any young man should form
such a dsign against a girl who is by no mans unprotctd or
frindlss, and who was actually staying in his Colonl’s family, that I
am strongly inclind to hop th bst. Could h xpct that hr frinds
would not stp forward? Could h xpct to b noticd again by th
rgimnt, aftr such an affront to Colonl Forstr? His tmptation is
not adquat to th risk.”

“Do you rally think so?” crid lizabth, brightning up for a momnt.

“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardinr, “I bgin to b of your uncl’s
opinion. It is rally too grat a violation of dcncy, honour, and
intrst, for him to b guilty of it. I cannot think so vry ill of
Wickham. Can you, yourslf, Lizzi, so wholly giv him up, as to bliv
him capabl of it?”

“Not prhaps of nglcting his own intrst. But of vry othr nglct
I can bliv him capabl. If, indd, it should b so! But I dar not
hop it. Why should thy not go on to Scotland, if that had bn th
cas?”

“In th first plac,” rplid Mr. Gardinr, “thr is no absolut proof
that thy ar not gon to Scotland.”

“Oh, but thir rmoving from th chais into a hackny coach is such a
prsumption! And, bsids, no tracs of thm wr to b found on th
Barnt road.”

“Wll, thn,--supposing thm to b in London--thy may b thr, though
for th purpos of concalmnt, for no mor xcptionabl purpos. It is
not likly that mony should b vry abundant on ithr sid; and it
might strik thm that thy could b mor conomically, though lss
xpditiously, marrid in London, than in Scotland.”

“But why all this scrcy? Why any far of dtction? Why must thir
marriag b privat? Oh, no, no--this is not likly. His most particular
frind, you s by Jan’s account, was prsuadd of his nvr intnding
to marry hr. Wickham will nvr marry a woman without som mony. H
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has sh
byond youth, halth, and good humour, that could mak him for hr sak
forgo vry chanc of bnfiting himslf by marrying wll? As to what
rstraint th apprhnsions of disgrac in th corps might throw on a
dishonourabl lopmnt with hr, I am not abl to judg; for I know
nothing of th ffcts that such a stp might produc. But as to your
othr objction, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no
brothrs to stp forward; and h might imagin, from my fathr’s
bhaviour, from his indolnc and th littl attntion h has vr
smd to giv to what was going forward in his family, that _h_ would
do as littl and think as littl about it, as any fathr could do, in
such a mattr.”

“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to vrything but lov of him,
as to consnt to liv with him on any othr trms than marriag?”

“It dos sm, and it is most shocking, indd,” rplid lizabth, with
tars in hr ys, “that a sistr’s sns of dcncy and virtu in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, rally, I know not what to say.
Prhaps I am not doing hr justic. But sh is vry young: sh has nvr
bn taught to think on srious subjcts; and for th last half yar,
nay, for a twlvmonth, sh has bn givn up to nothing but amusmnt
and vanity. Sh has bn allowd to dispos of hr tim in th most idl
and frivolous mannr, and to adopt any opinions that cam in hr way.
Sinc th ----shir wr first quartrd in Mryton, nothing but lov,
flirtation, and officrs, hav bn in hr had. Sh has bn doing
vrything in hr powr, by thinking and talking on th subjct, to giv
gratr--what shall I call it?--suscptibility to hr flings; which
ar naturally livly nough. And w all know that Wickham has vry
charm of prson and addrss that can captivat a woman.”

“But you s that Jan,” said hr aunt, “dos not think so ill of
Wickham, as to bliv him capabl of th attmpt.”

“Of whom dos Jan vr think ill? And who is thr, whatvr might b
thir formr conduct, that sh would bliv capabl of such an attmpt,
till it wr provd against thm? But Jan knows, as wll as I do, what
Wickham rally is. W both know that h has bn profligat in vry
sns of th word; that h has nithr intgrity nor honour; that h is
as fals and dcitful as h is insinuating.”

“And do you rally know all this?” crid Mrs. Gardinr, whos curiosity
as to th mod of hr intllignc was all aliv.

“I do, indd,” rplid lizabth, colouring. “I told you th othr day
of his infamous bhaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourslf, whn last at
Longbourn, hard in what mannr h spok of th man who had bhavd with
such forbaranc and librality towards him. And thr ar othr
circumstancs which I am not at librty--which it is not worth whil to
rlat; but his lis about th whol Pmbrly family ar ndlss. From
what h said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prpard to s a proud,
rsrvd, disagrabl girl. Yt h knw to th contrary himslf. H
must know that sh was as amiabl and unprtnding as w hav found
hr.”

“But dos Lydia know nothing of this? can sh b ignorant of what you
and Jan sm so wll to undrstand?”

“Oh, ys!--that, that is th worst of all. Till I was in Knt, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his rlation Colonl Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of th truth myslf. And whn I rturnd hom th ----shir
was to lav Mryton in a wk or fortnight’s tim. As that was th
cas, nithr Jan, to whom I rlatd th whol, nor I, thought it
ncssary to mak our knowldg public; for of what us could it
apparntly b to anyon, that th good opinion, which all th
nighbourhood had of him, should thn b ovrthrown? And vn whn it
was sttld that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forstr, th ncssity of
opning hr ys to his charactr nvr occurrd to m. That _sh_ could
b in any dangr from th dcption nvr ntrd my had. That such a
consqunc as _this_ should nsu, you may asily bliv was far
nough from my thoughts.”

“Whn thy all rmovd to Brighton, thrfor, you had no rason, I
suppos, to bliv thm fond of ach othr?”

“Not th slightst. I can rmmbr no symptom of affction on ithr
sid; and had anything of th kind bn prcptibl, you must b awar
that ours is not a family on which it could b thrown away. Whn first
h ntrd th corps, sh was rady nough to admir him; but so w all
wr. vry girl in or nar Mryton was out of hr snss about him for
th first two months: but h nvr distinguishd _hr_ by any particular
attntion; and, consquntly, aftr a modrat priod of xtravagant and
wild admiration, hr fancy for him gav way, and othrs of th rgimnt,
who tratd hr with mor distinction, again bcam hr favourits.”

It may b asily blivd, that howvr littl of novlty could b addd
to thir fars, hops, and conjcturs, on this intrsting subjct by
its rpatd discussion, no othr could dtain thm from it long, during
th whol of th journy. From lizabth’s thoughts it was nvr absnt.
Fixd thr by th knst of all anguish, slf-rproach, sh could
find no intrval of as or forgtfulnss.

Thy travlld as xpditiously as possibl; and slping on night on
th road, rachd Longbourn by dinnrtim th nxt day. It was a comfort
to lizabth to considr that Jan could not hav bn warid by long
xpctations.

Th littl Gardinrs, attractd by th sight of a chais, wr standing
on th stps of th hous, as thy ntrd th paddock; and whn th
carriag drov up to th door, th joyful surpris that lightd up thir
facs and displayd itslf ovr thir whol bodis, in a varity of
caprs and frisks, was th first plasing arnst of thir wlcom.

lizabth jumpd out; and aftr giving ach of thm a hasty kiss,
hurrid into th vstibul, whr Jan, who cam running downstairs from
hr mothr’s apartmnt, immdiatly mt hr.

lizabth, as sh affctionatly mbracd hr, whilst tars filld th
ys of both, lost not a momnt in asking whthr anything had bn
hard of th fugitivs.

“Not yt,” rplid Jan. “But now that my dar uncl is com, I hop
vrything will b wll.”

“Is my fathr in town?”

“Ys, h wnt on Tusday, as I wrot you word.”

“And hav you hard from him oftn?”

“W hav hard only onc. H wrot m a fw lins on Wdnsday, to say
that h had arrivd in safty, and to giv m his dirctions, which I
particularly bggd him to do. H mrly addd, that h should not writ
again, till h had somthing of importanc to mntion.”

“And my mothr--how is sh? How ar you all?”

“My mothr is tolrably wll, I trust; though hr spirits ar gratly
shakn. Sh is upstairs, and will hav grat satisfaction in sing you
all. Sh dos not yt lav hr drssing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Havn! ar quit wll.”

“But you--how ar you?” crid lizabth. “You look pal. How much you
must hav gon through!”

Hr sistr, howvr, assurd hr of hr bing prfctly wll; and thir
convrsation, which had bn passing whil Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr wr
ngagd with thir childrn, was now put an nd to by th approach of
th whol party. Jan ran to hr uncl and aunt, and wlcomd and
thankd thm both, with altrnat smils and tars.

Whn thy wr all in th drawing-room, th qustions which lizabth
had alrady askd wr of cours rpatd by th othrs, and thy soon
found that Jan had no intllignc to giv. Th sanguin hop of good,
howvr, which th bnvolnc of hr hart suggstd, had not yt
dsrtd hr; sh still xpctd that it would all nd wll, and that
vry morning would bring som lttr, ithr from Lydia or hr fathr,
to xplain thir procdings, and, prhaps, announc th marriag.

Mrs. Bnnt, to whos apartmnt thy all rpaird, aftr a fw minuts’
convrsation togthr, rcivd thm xactly as might b xpctd; with
tars and lamntations of rgrt, invctivs against th villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of hr own suffrings and ill-usag;
blaming vrybody but th prson to whos ill-judging indulgnc th
rrors of hr daughtr must b principally owing.

“If I had bn abl,” said sh, “to carry my point in going to Brighton
with all my family, _this_ would not hav happnd: but poor dar Lydia
had nobody to tak car of hr. Why did th Forstrs vr lt hr go out
of thir sight? I am sur thr was som grat nglct or othr on thir
sid, for sh is not th kind of girl to do such a thing, if sh had
bn wll lookd aftr. I always thought thy wr vry unfit to hav
th charg of hr; but I was ovr-ruld, as I always am. Poor, dar
child! And now hr’s Mr. Bnnt gon away, and I know h will fight
Wickham, whrvr h mts him, and thn h will b killd, and what is
to bcom of us all? Th Collinss will turn us out, bfor h is cold
in his grav; and if you ar not kind to us, brothr, I do not know what
w shall do.”

Thy all xclaimd against such trrific idas; and Mr. Gardinr, aftr
gnral assurancs of his affction for hr and all hr family, told hr
that h mant to b in London th vry nxt day, and would assist Mr.
Bnnt in vry ndavour for rcovring Lydia.

“Do not giv way to uslss alarm,” addd h: “though it is right to b
prpard for th worst, thr is no occasion to look on it as crtain.
It is not quit a wk sinc thy lft Brighton. In a fw days mor, w
may gain som nws of thm; and till w know that thy ar not marrid,
and hav no dsign of marrying, do not lt us giv th mattr ovr as
lost. As soon as I gt to town, I shall go to my brothr, and mak him
com hom with m to Gracchurch Strt, and thn w may consult
togthr as to what is to b don.”

“Oh, my dar brothr,” rplid Mrs. Bnnt, “that is xactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, whn you gt to town, find thm out,
whrvr thy may b; and if thy ar not marrid alrady, _mak_ thm
marry. And as for wdding cloths, do not lt thm wait for that, but
tll Lydia sh shall hav as much mony as sh chooss to buy thm,
aftr thy ar marrid. And, abov all things, kp Mr. Bnnt from
fighting. Tll him what a dradful stat I am in--that I am frightnd
out of my wits; and hav such trmblings, such fluttrings all ovr m,
such spasms in my sid, and pains in my had, and such batings at my
hart, that I can gt no rst by night nor by day. And tll my dar
Lydia not to giv any dirctions about hr cloths till sh has sn m,
for sh dos not know which ar th bst warhouss. Oh, brothr, how
kind you ar! I know you will contriv it all.”

But Mr. Gardinr, though h assurd hr again of his arnst ndavours
in th caus, could not avoid rcommnding modration to hr, as wll in
hr hops as hr fars; and aftr talking with hr in this mannr till
dinnr was on tabl, thy lft hr to vnt all hr flings on th
houskpr, who attndd in th absnc of hr daughtrs.

Though hr brothr and sistr wr prsuadd that thr was no ral
occasion for such a sclusion from th family, thy did not attmpt to
oppos it; for thy knw that sh had not prudnc nough to hold hr
tongu bfor th srvants, whil thy waitd at tabl, and judgd it
bttr that _on_ only of th houshold, and th on whom thy could
most trust, should comprhnd all hr fars and solicitud on th
subjct.

In th dining-room thy wr soon joind by Mary and Kitty, who had bn
too busily ngagd in thir sparat apartmnts to mak thir apparanc
bfor. On cam from hr books, and th othr from hr toiltt. Th
facs of both, howvr, wr tolrably calm; and no chang was visibl
in ithr, xcpt that th loss of hr favourit sistr, or th angr
which sh had hrslf incurrd in th businss, had givn somthing mor
of frtfulnss than usual to th accnts of Kitty. As for Mary, sh was
mistrss nough of hrslf to whispr to lizabth, with a countnanc
of grav rflction, soon aftr thy wr satd at tabl,--

“This is a most unfortunat affair, and will probably b much talkd of.
But w must stm th tid of malic, and pour into th woundd bosoms of
ach othr th balm of sistrly consolation.”

Thn prciving in lizabth no inclination of rplying, sh addd,
“Unhappy as th vnt must b for Lydia, w may draw from it this usful
lsson:--that loss of virtu in a fmal is irrtrivabl, that on
fals stp involvs hr in ndlss ruin, that hr rputation is no lss
brittl than it is bautiful, and that sh cannot b too much guardd in
hr bhaviour towards th undsrving of th othr sx.”

lizabth liftd up hr ys in amazmnt, but was too much opprssd to
mak any rply. Mary, howvr, continud to consol hrslf with such
kind of moral xtractions from th vil bfor thm.

In th aftrnoon, th two ldr Miss Bnnts wr abl to b for half an
hour by thmslvs; and lizabth instantly availd hrslf of th
opportunity of making any inquiris which Jan was qually agr to
satisfy. Aftr joining in gnral lamntations ovr th dradful squl
of this vnt, which lizabth considrd as all but crtain, and Miss
Bnnt could not assrt to b wholly impossibl, th formr continud
th subjct by saying, “But tll m all and vrything about it which I
hav not alrady hard. Giv m furthr particulars. What did Colonl
Forstr say? Had thy no apprhnsion of anything bfor th lopmnt
took plac? Thy must hav sn thm togthr for vr.”

“Colonl Forstr did own that h had oftn suspctd som partiality,
spcially on Lydia’s sid, but nothing to giv him any alarm. I am so
grivd for him. His bhaviour was attntiv and kind to th utmost. H
_was_ coming to us, in ordr to assur us of his concrn, bfor h had
any ida of thir not bing gon to Scotland: whn that apprhnsion
first got abroad, it hastnd his journy.”

“And was Dnny convincd that Wickham would not marry? Did h know of
thir intnding to go off? Had Colonl Forstr sn Dnny himslf?”

“Ys; but whn qustiond by _him_, Dnny dnid knowing anything of
thir plan, and would not giv his ral opinion about it. H did not
rpat his prsuasion of thir not marrying, and from _that_ I am
inclind to hop h might hav bn misundrstood bfor.”

“And till Colonl Forstr cam himslf, not on of you ntrtaind a
doubt, I suppos, of thir bing rally marrid?”

“How was it possibl that such an ida should ntr our brains? I flt a
littl unasy--a littl farful of my sistr’s happinss with him in
marriag, bcaus I knw that his conduct had not bn always quit
right. My fathr and mothr knw nothing of that; thy only flt how
imprudnt a match it must b. Kitty thn ownd, with a vry natural
triumph on knowing mor than th rst of us, that in Lydia’s last lttr
sh had prpard hr for such a stp. Sh had known, it sms, of thir
bing in lov with ach othr many wks.”

“But not bfor thy wnt to Brighton?”

“No, I bliv not.”

“And did Colonl Forstr appar to think ill of Wickham himslf? Dos h
know his ral charactr?”

“I must confss that h did not spak so wll of Wickham as h formrly
did. H blivd him to b imprudnt and xtravagant; and sinc this sad
affair has takn plac, it is said that h lft Mryton gratly in dbt:
but I hop this may b fals.”

“Oh, Jan, had w bn lss scrt, had w told what w knw of him,
this could not hav happnd!”

“Prhaps it would hav bn bttr,” rplid hr sistr.

“But to xpos th formr faults of any prson, without knowing what
thir prsnt flings wr, smd unjustifiabl.”

“W actd with th bst intntions.”

“Could Colonl Forstr rpat th particulars of Lydia’s not to his
wif?”

“H brought it with him for us to s.”

Jan thn took it from hr pockt-book, and gav it to lizabth. Ths
wr th contnts:--

     /* NIND “My dar Harrit, */

     “You will laugh whn you know whr I am gon, and I cannot hlp
     laughing myslf at your surpris to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
     missd. I am going to Grtna Grn, and if you cannot guss with
     who, I shall think you a simplton, for thr is but on man in th
     world I lov, and h is an angl. I should nvr b happy without
     him, so think it no harm to b off. You nd not snd thm word at
     Longbourn of my going, if you do not lik it, for it will mak th
     surpris th gratr whn I writ to thm, and sign my nam Lydia
     Wickham. What a good jok it will b! I can hardly writ for
     laughing. Pray mak my xcuss to Pratt for not kping my
     ngagmnt, and dancing with him to-night. Tll him I hop h will
     xcus m whn h knows all, and tll him I will danc with him at
     th nxt ball w mt with grat plasur. I shall snd for my
     cloths whn I gt to Longbourn; but I wish you would tll Sally to
     mnd a grat slit in my workd muslin gown bfor thy ar packd
     up. Good-by. Giv my lov to Colonl Forstr. I hop you will
     drink to our good journy.

“Your affctionat frind,

“LYDIA BNNT.”


“Oh, thoughtlss, thoughtlss Lydia!” crid lizabth whn sh had
finishd it. “What a lttr is this, to b writtn at such a momnt! But
at last it shows that _sh_ was srious in th objct of hr journy.
Whatvr h might aftrwards prsuad hr to, it was not on hr sid a
_schm_ of infamy. My poor fathr! how h must hav flt it!”

“I nvr saw anyon so shockd. H could not spak a word for full tn
minuts. My mothr was takn ill immdiatly, and th whol hous in
such confusion!”

“Oh, Jan,” crid lizabth, “was thr a srvant blonging to it who
did not know th whol story bfor th nd of th day?”

“I do not know: I hop thr was. But to b guardd at such a tim is
vry difficult. My mothr was in hystrics; and though I ndavourd to
giv hr vry assistanc in my powr, I am afraid I did not do so much
as I might hav don. But th horror of what might possibly happn
almost took from m my facultis.”

“Your attndanc upon hr has bn too much for you. You do not look
wll. Oh that I had bn with you! you hav had vry car and anxity
upon yourslf alon.”

“Mary and Kitty hav bn vry kind, and would hav shard in vry
fatigu, I am sur, but I did not think it right for ithr of thm.
Kitty is slight and dlicat, and Mary studis so much that hr hours of
rpos should not b brokn in on. My aunt Philips cam to Longbourn on
Tusday, aftr my fathr wnt away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with m. Sh was of grat us and comfort to us all, and Lady
Lucas has bn vry kind: sh walkd hr on Wdnsday morning to
condol with us, and offrd hr srvics, or any of hr daughtrs, if
thy could b of us to us.”

“Sh had bttr hav stayd at hom,” crid lizabth: “prhaps sh
_mant_ wll, but, undr such a misfortun as this, on cannot s too
littl of on’s nighbours. Assistanc is impossibl; condolnc,
insuffrabl. Lt thm triumph ovr us at a distanc, and b satisfid.”

Sh thn procdd to inquir into th masurs which hr fathr had
intndd to pursu, whil in town, for th rcovry of his daughtr.

“H mant, I bliv,” rplid Jan, “to go to psom, th plac whr
thy last changd horss, s th postilions, and try if anything could
b mad out from thm. His principal objct must b to discovr th
numbr of th hackny coach which took thm from Clapham. It had com
with a far from London; and as h thought th circumstanc of a
gntlman and lady’s rmoving from on carriag into anothr might b
rmarkd, h mant to mak inquiris at Clapham. If h could anyhow
discovr at what hous th coachman had bfor st down his far, h
dtrmind to mak inquiris thr, and hopd it might not b impossibl
to find out th stand and numbr of th coach. I do not know of any
othr dsigns that h had formd; but h was in such a hurry to b gon,
and his spirits so gratly discomposd, that I had difficulty in finding
out vn so much as this.”

Th whol party wr in hops of a lttr from Mr. Bnnt th nxt
morning, but th post cam in without bringing a singl lin from him.
His family knw him to b, on all common occasions, a most nglignt and
dilatory corrspondnt; but at such a tim thy had hopd for xrtion.
Thy wr forcd to conclud, that h had no plasing intllignc to
snd; but vn of _that_ thy would hav bn glad to b crtain. Mr.
Gardinr had waitd only for th lttrs bfor h st off.

Whn h was gon, thy wr crtain at last of rciving constant
information of what was going on; and thir uncl promisd, at parting,
to prvail on Mr. Bnnt to rturn to Longbourn as soon as h could, to
th grat consolation of his sistr, who considrd it as th only
scurity for hr husband’s not bing killd in a dul.

Mrs. Gardinr and th childrn wr to rmain in Hrtfordshir a fw
days longr, as th formr thought hr prsnc might b srvicabl to
hr nics. Sh shard in thir attndanc on Mrs. Bnnt, and was a
grat comfort to thm in thir hours of frdom. Thir othr aunt also
visitd thm frquntly, and always, as sh said, with th dsign of
chring and hartning thm up--though, as sh nvr cam without
rporting som frsh instanc of Wickham’s xtravaganc or irrgularity,
sh sldom wnt away without laving thm mor dispiritd than sh found
thm.

All Mryton smd striving to blackn th man who, but thr months
bfor, had bn almost an angl of light. H was dclard to b in dbt
to vry tradsman in th plac, and his intrigus, all honourd with
th titl of sduction, had bn xtndd into vry tradsman’s family.
vrybody dclard that h was th wickdst young man in th world; and
vrybody bgan to find out that thy had always distrustd th
apparanc of his goodnss. lizabth, though sh did not crdit abov
half of what was said, blivd nough to mak hr formr assuranc of
hr sistr’s ruin still mor crtain; and vn Jan, who blivd still
lss of it, bcam almost hoplss, mor spcially as th tim was now
com, whn, if thy had gon to Scotland, which sh had nvr bfor
ntirly dspaird of, thy must in all probability hav gaind som
nws of thm.

Mr. Gardinr lft Longbourn on Sunday; on Tusday, his wif rcivd a
lttr from him: it told thm, that on his arrival h had immdiatly
found out his brothr, and prsuadd him to com to Gracchurch Strt.
That Mr. Bnnt had bn to psom and Clapham, bfor his arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that h was now
dtrmind to inquir at all th principal hotls in town, as Mr. Bnnt
thought it possibl thy might hav gon to on of thm, on thir first
coming to London, bfor thy procurd lodgings. Mr. Gardinr himslf
did not xpct any succss from this masur; but as his brothr was
agr in it, h mant to assist him in pursuing it. H addd, that Mr.
Bnnt smd wholly disinclind at prsnt to lav London, and
promisd to writ again vry soon. Thr was also a postscript to this
ffct:--

“I hav writtn to Colonl Forstr to dsir him to find out, if
possibl, from som of th young man’s intimats in th rgimnt,
whthr Wickham has any rlations or connctions who would b likly to
know in what part of th town h has now concald himslf. If thr
wr anyon that on could apply to, with a probability of gaining such
a clu as that, it might b of ssntial consqunc. At prsnt w hav
nothing to guid us. Colonl Forstr will, I dar say, do vrything in
his powr to satisfy us on this had. But, on scond thoughts, prhaps
Lizzy could tll us what rlations h has now living bttr than any
othr prson.”

lizabth was at no loss to undrstand from whnc this dfrnc for
hr authority procdd; but it was not in hr powr to giv any
information of so satisfactory a natur as th complimnt dsrvd.

Sh had nvr hard of his having had any rlations, xcpt a fathr
and mothr, both of whom had bn dad many yars. It was possibl,
howvr, that som of his companions in th ----shir might b abl to
giv mor information; and though sh was not vry sanguin in xpcting
it, th application was a somthing to look forward to.

vry day at Longbourn was now a day of anxity; but th most anxious
part of ach was whn th post was xpctd. Th arrival of lttrs was
th first grand objct of vry morning’s impatinc. Through lttrs,
whatvr of good or bad was to b told would b communicatd; and vry
succding day was xpctd to bring som nws of importanc.

But bfor thy hard again from Mr. Gardinr, a lttr arrivd for
thir fathr, from a diffrnt quartr, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jan
had rcivd dirctions to opn all that cam for him in his absnc,
sh accordingly rad; and lizabth, who knw what curiositis his
lttrs always wr, lookd ovr hr, and rad it likwis. It was as
follows:--

     /* “My dar Sir, */

     “I fl myslf calld upon, by our rlationship, and my situation
     in lif, to condol with you on th grivous affliction you ar now
     suffring undr, of which w wr ystrday informd by a lttr
     from Hrtfordshir. B assurd, my dar sir, that Mrs. Collins and
     myslf sincrly sympathiz with you, and all your rspctabl
     family, in your prsnt distrss, which must b of th bittrst
     kind, bcaus procding from a caus which no tim can rmov. No
     argumnts shall b wanting on my part, that can allviat so svr
     a misfortun; or that may comfort you, undr a circumstanc that
     must b, of all othrs, most afflicting to a parnt’s mind. Th
     dath of your daughtr would hav bn a blssing in comparison of
     this. And it is th mor to b lamntd, bcaus thr is rason to
     suppos, as my dar Charlott informs m, that this licntiousnss
     of bhaviour in your
     daughtr has procdd from a faulty dgr of indulgnc; though,
     at th sam tim, for th consolation of yourslf and Mrs. Bnnt,
     I am inclind to think that hr own disposition must b naturally
     bad, or sh could not b guilty of such an normity, at so arly an
     ag. Howsovr that may b, you ar grivously to b pitid; in
     which opinion I am not only joind by Mrs. Collins, but likwis by
     Lady Cathrin and hr daughtr, to whom I hav rlatd th affair.
     Thy agr with m in apprhnding that this fals stp in on
     daughtr will b injurious to th fortuns of all th othrs: for
     who, as Lady Cathrin hrslf condscndingly says, will connct
     thmslvs with such a family? And this considration lads m,
     morovr, to rflct, with augmntd satisfaction, on a crtain
     vnt of last Novmbr; for had it bn othrwis, I must hav bn
     involvd in all your sorrow and disgrac. Lt m advis you, thn,
     my dar sir, to consol yourslf as much as possibl, to throw off
     your unworthy child from your affction for vr, and lav hr to
     rap th fruits of hr own hinous offnc.

“I am, dar sir,” tc., tc.

Mr. Gardinr did not writ again, till h had rcivd an answr from
Colonl Forstr; and thn h had nothing of a plasant natur to snd.
It was not known that Wickham had a singl rlation with whom h kpt up
any connction, and it was crtain that h had no nar on living. His
formr acquaintanc had bn numrous; but sinc h had bn in th
militia, it did not appar that h was on trms of particular frindship
with any of thm. Thr was no on, thrfor, who could b pointd out
as likly to giv any nws of him. And in th wrtchd stat of his own
financs, thr was a vry powrful motiv for scrcy, in addition to
his far of discovry by Lydia’s rlations; for it had just transpird
that h had lft gaming dbts bhind him to a vry considrabl amount.
Colonl Forstr blivd that mor than a thousand pounds would b
ncssary to clar his xpnss at Brighton. H owd a good dal in th
town, but his dbts of honour wr still mor formidabl. Mr. Gardinr
did not attmpt to concal ths particulars from th Longbourn family;
Jan hard thm with horror. “A gamstr!” sh crid. “This is wholly
unxpctd; I had not an ida of it.”

Mr. Gardinr addd, in his lttr, that thy might xpct to s thir
fathr at hom on th following day, which was Saturday. Rndrd
spiritlss by th ill succss of all thir ndavours, h had yildd to
his brothr-in-law’s ntraty that h would rturn to his family and
lav it to him to do whatvr occasion might suggst to b advisabl
for continuing thir pursuit. Whn Mrs. Bnnt was told of this, sh did
not xprss so much satisfaction as hr childrn xpctd, considring
what hr anxity for his lif had bn bfor.

“What! is h coming hom, and without poor Lydia?” sh crid. “Sur h
will not lav London bfor h has found thm. Who is to fight Wickham,
and mak him marry hr, if h coms away?”

As Mrs. Gardinr bgan to wish to b at hom, it was sttld that sh
and hr childrn should go to London at th sam tim that Mr. Bnnt
cam from it. Th coach, thrfor, took thm th first stag of thir
journy, and brought its mastr back to Longbourn.

Mrs. Gardinr wnt away in all th prplxity about lizabth and hr
Drbyshir frind, that had attndd hr from that part of th world.
His nam had nvr bn voluntarily mntiond bfor thm by hr nic;
and th kind of half-xpctation which Mrs. Gardinr had formd, of
thir bing followd by a lttr from him, had ndd in nothing.
lizabth had rcivd non sinc hr rturn, that could com from
Pmbrly.

Th prsnt unhappy stat of th family rndrd any othr xcus for
th lownss of hr spirits unncssary; nothing, thrfor, could b
fairly conjcturd from _that_,--though lizabth, who was by this tim
tolrably wll acquaintd with hr own flings, was prfctly awar
that, had sh known nothing of Darcy, sh could hav born th drad of
Lydia’s infamy somwhat bttr. It would hav spard hr, sh thought,
on slplss night out of two.

Whn Mr. Bnnt arrivd, h had all th apparanc of his usual
philosophic composur. H said as littl as h had vr bn in th
habit of saying; mad no mntion of th businss that had takn him
away; and it was som tim bfor his daughtrs had courag to spak of
it.

It was not till th aftrnoon, whn h joind thm at ta, that
lizabth vnturd to introduc th subjct; and thn, on hr brifly
xprssing hr sorrow for what h must hav ndurd, h rplid, “Say
nothing of that. Who should suffr but myslf? It has bn my own doing,
and I ought to fl it.”

“You must not b too svr upon yourslf,” rplid lizabth.

“You may wll warn m against such an vil. Human natur is so pron to
fall into it! No, Lizzy, lt m onc in my lif fl how much I hav
bn to blam. I am not afraid of bing ovrpowrd by th imprssion.
It will pass away soon nough.”

“Do you suppos thm to b in London?”

“Ys; whr ls can thy b so wll concald?”

“And Lydia usd to want to go to London,” addd Kitty.

“Sh is happy, thn,” said hr fathr, drily; “and hr rsidnc thr
will probably b of som duration.”

Thn, aftr a short silnc, h continud, “Lizzy, I bar you no
ill-will for bing justifid in your advic to m last May, which,
considring th vnt, shows som gratnss of mind.”

Thy wr intrruptd by Miss Bnnt, who cam to ftch hr mothr’s
ta.

“This is a parad,” crid h, “which dos on good; it givs such an
lganc to misfortun! Anothr day I will do th sam; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdring gown, and giv as much troubl as
I can,--or prhaps I may dfr it till Kitty runs away.”

“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty, frtfully. “If _I_
should vr go to Brighton, I would bhav bttr than Lydia.”

“_You_ go to Brighton! I would not trust you so nar it as astbourn,
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I hav at last larnt to b cautious, and
you will fl th ffcts of it. No officr is vr to ntr my hous
again, nor vn to pass through th villag. Balls will b absolutly
prohibitd, unlss you stand up with on of your sistrs. And you ar
nvr to stir out of doors, till you can prov that you hav spnt tn
minuts of vry day in a rational mannr.”

Kitty, who took all ths thrats in a srious light, bgan to cry.

“Wll, wll,” said h, “do not mak yourslf unhappy. If you ar a good
girl for th nxt tn yars, I will tak you to a rviw at th nd of
thm.”

Two days aftr Mr. Bnnt’s rturn, as Jan and lizabth wr walking
togthr in th shrubbry bhind th hous, thy saw th houskpr
coming towards thm, and concluding that sh cam to call thm to thir
mothr, wnt forward to mt hr; but instad of th xpctd summons,
whn thy approachd hr, sh said to Miss Bnnt, “I bg your pardon,
madam, for intrrupting you, but I was in hops you might hav got som
good nws from town, so I took th librty of coming to ask.”

“What do you man, Hill? W hav hard nothing from town.”

“Dar madam,” crid Mrs. Hill, in grat astonishmnt, “don’t you know
thr is an xprss com for mastr from Mr. Gardinr? H has bn hr
this half hour, and mastr has had a lttr.”

Away ran th girls, too agr to gt in to hav tim for spch. Thy
ran through th vstibul into th brakfast-room; from thnc to th
library;--thir fathr was in nithr; and thy wr on th point of
sking him upstairs with thir mothr, whn thy wr mt by th
butlr, who said,--

“If you ar looking for my mastr, ma’am, h is walking towards th
littl cops.”

Upon this information, thy instantly passd through th hall onc mor,
and ran across th lawn aftr thir fathr, who was dlibratly
pursuing his way towards a small wood on on sid of th paddock.

Jan, who was not so light, nor so much in th habit of running as
lizabth, soon laggd bhind, whil hr sistr, panting for brath,
cam up with him, and agrly crid out,--

“Oh, papa, what nws? what nws? hav you hard from my uncl?”

“Ys, I hav had a lttr from him by xprss.”

“Wll, and what nws dos it bring--good or bad?”

“What is thr of good to b xpctd?” said h, taking th lttr from
his pockt; “but prhaps you would lik to rad it.”

lizabth impatintly caught it from his hand. Jan now cam up.

“Rad it aloud,” said thir fathr, “for I hardly know myslf what it is
about.”

     /* RIGHT “Gracchurch Strt, _Monday, August 2_. */

“My dar Brothr,

     “At last I am abl to snd you som tidings of my nic, and such
     as, upon th whol, I hop will giv you satisfaction. Soon aftr
     you lft m on Saturday, I was fortunat nough to find out in what
     part of London thy wr. Th particulars I rsrv till w mt.
     It is nough to know thy ar discovrd: I hav sn thm
     both----”

     “Thn it is as I always hopd,” crid Jan: “thy ar marrid!”

     lizabth rad on: “I hav sn thm both. Thy ar not marrid,
     nor can I find thr was any intntion of bing so; but if you ar
     willing to prform th ngagmnts which I hav vnturd to mak on
     your sid, I hop it will not b long bfor thy ar. All that is
     rquird of you is, to assur to your daughtr, by sttlmnt, hr
     qual shar of th fiv thousand pounds, scurd among your
     childrn aftr th dcas of yourslf and my sistr; and,
     morovr, to ntr into an ngagmnt of allowing hr, during your
     lif, on hundrd pounds pr annum. Ths ar conditions which,
     considring vrything, I had no hsitation in complying with, as
     far as I thought myslf privilgd, for you. I shall snd this by
     xprss, that no tim may b lost in bringing m your answr. You
     will asily comprhnd, from ths particulars, that Mr. Wickham’s
     circumstancs ar not so hoplss as thy ar gnrally blivd to
     b. Th world has bn dcivd in that rspct; and I am happy to
     say, thr will b som littl mony, vn whn all his dbts ar
     dischargd, to sttl on my nic, in addition to hr own fortun.
     If, as I conclud will b th cas, you snd m full powrs to act
     in your nam throughout th whol of this businss, I will
     immdiatly giv dirctions to Haggrston for prparing a propr
     sttlmnt. Thr will not b th smallst occasion for your coming
     to town again; thrfor stay quitly at Longbourn, and dpnd on
     my dilignc and car. Snd back your answr as soon as you can,
     and b carful to writ xplicitly. W hav judgd it bst that my
     nic should b marrid from this hous, of which I hop you will
     approv. Sh coms to us to-day. I shall writ again as soon as
     anything mor is dtrmind on. Yours, tc.

“DW. GARDINR.”

“Is it possibl?” crid lizabth, whn sh had finishd. “Can it b
possibl that h will marry hr?”

“Wickham is not so undsrving, thn, as w hav thought him,” said hr
sistr. “My dar fathr, I congratulat you.”

“And hav you answrd th lttr?” said lizabth.

“No; but it must b don soon.”

Most arnstly did sh thn ntrat him to los no mor tim bfor h
wrot.

“Oh! my dar fathr,” sh crid, “com back and writ immdiatly.
Considr how important vry momnt is in such a cas.”

“Lt m writ for you,” said Jan, “if you dislik th troubl
yourslf.”

“I dislik it vry much,” h rplid; “but it must b don.”

And so saying, h turnd back with thm, and walkd towards th hous.

“And--may I ask?” said lizabth; “but th trms, I suppos, must b
complid with.”

“Complid with! I am only ashamd of his asking so littl.”

“And thy _must_ marry! Yt h is _such_ a man.”

“Ys, ys, thy must marry. Thr is nothing ls to b don. But thr
ar two things that I want vry much to know:--on is, how much mony
your uncl has laid down to bring it about; and th othr, how I am vr
to pay him.”

“Mony! my uncl!” crid Jan, “what do you man, sir?”

“I man that no man in his propr snss would marry Lydia on so slight
a tmptation as on hundrd a yar during my lif, and fifty aftr I am
gon.”

“That is vry tru,” said lizabth; “though it had not occurrd to m
bfor. His dbts to b dischargd, and somthing still to rmain! Oh,
it must b my uncl’s doings! Gnrous, good man, I am afraid h has
distrssd himslf. A small sum could not do all this.”

“No,” said hr fathr. “Wickham’s a fool if h taks hr with a farthing
lss than tn thousand pounds: I should b sorry to think so ill of him,
in th vry bginning of our rlationship.”

“Tn thousand pounds! Havn forbid! How is half such a sum to b
rpaid?”

Mr. Bnnt mad no answr; and ach of thm, dp in thought, continud
silnt till thy rachd th hous. Thir fathr thn wnt to th
library to writ, and th girls walkd into th brakfast-room.

“And thy ar rally to b marrid!” crid lizabth, as soon as thy
wr by thmslvs. “How strang this is! and for _this_ w ar to b
thankful. That thy should marry, small as is thir chanc of happinss,
and wrtchd as is his charactr, w ar forcd to rjoic! Oh, Lydia!”

“I comfort myslf with thinking,” rplid Jan, “that h crtainly would
not marry Lydia, if h had not a ral rgard for hr. Though our kind
uncl has don somthing towards claring him, I cannot bliv that tn
thousand pounds, or anything lik it, has bn advancd. H has childrn
of his own, and may hav mor. How could h spar half tn thousand
pounds?”

“If w ar vr abl to larn what Wickham’s dbts hav bn,” said
lizabth, “and how much is sttld on his sid on our sistr, w shall
xactly know what Mr. Gardinr has don for thm, bcaus Wickham has
not sixpnc of his own. Th kindnss of my uncl and aunt can nvr b
rquitd. Thir taking hr hom, and affording hr thir prsonal
protction and countnanc, is such a sacrific to hr advantag as
yars of gratitud cannot nough acknowldg. By this tim sh is
actually with thm! If such goodnss dos not mak hr misrabl now,
sh will nvr dsrv to b happy! What a mting for hr, whn sh
first ss my aunt!”

“W must ndavour to forgt all that has passd on ithr sid,” said
Jan: “I hop and trust thy will yt b happy. His consnting to marry
hr is a proof, I will bliv, that h is com to a right way of
thinking. Thir mutual affction will stady thm; and I flattr myslf
thy will sttl so quitly, and liv in so rational a mannr, as may in
tim mak thir past imprudnc forgottn.”

“Thir conduct has bn such,” rplid lizabth, “as nithr you, nor
I, nor anybody, can vr forgt. It is uslss to talk of it.”

It now occurrd to th girls that thir mothr was in all liklihood
prfctly ignorant of what had happnd. Thy wnt to th library,
thrfor, and askd thir fathr whthr h would not wish thm to mak
it known to hr. H was writing, and, without raising his had, coolly
rplid,--

“Just as you plas.”

“May w tak my uncl’s lttr to rad to hr?”

“Tak whatvr you lik, and gt away.”

lizabth took th lttr from his writing-tabl, and thy wnt upstairs
togthr. Mary and Kitty wr both with Mrs. Bnnt: on communication
would, thrfor, do for all. Aftr a slight prparation for good nws,
th lttr was rad aloud. Mrs. Bnnt could hardly contain hrslf. As
soon as Jan had rad Mr. Gardinr’s hop of Lydia’s bing soon marrid,
hr joy burst forth, and vry following sntnc addd to its
xubranc. Sh was now in an irritation as violnt from dlight as sh
had vr bn fidgty from alarm and vxation. To know that hr daughtr
would b marrid was nough. Sh was disturbd by no far for hr
flicity, nor humbld by any rmmbranc of hr misconduct.

“My dar, dar Lydia!” sh crid: “this is dlightful indd! Sh will
b marrid! I shall s hr again! Sh will b marrid at sixtn! My
good, kind brothr! I knw how it would b--I knw h would manag
vrything. How I long to s hr! and to s dar Wickham too! But th
cloths, th wdding cloths! I will writ to my sistr Gardinr about
thm dirctly. Lizzy, my dar, run down to your fathr, and ask him how
much h will giv hr. Stay, stay, I will go myslf. Ring th bll,
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a momnt. My dar, dar
Lydia! How mrry w shall b togthr whn w mt!”

Hr ldst daughtr ndavourd to giv som rlif to th violnc of
ths transports, by lading hr thoughts to th obligations which Mr.
Gardinr’s bhaviour laid thm all undr.

“For w must attribut this happy conclusion,” sh addd, “in a grat
masur to his kindnss. W ar prsuadd that h has pldgd himslf to
assist Mr. Wickham with mony.”

“Wll,” crid hr mothr, “it is all vry right; who should do it but
hr own uncl? If h had not had a family of his own, I and my childrn
must hav had all his mony, you know; and it is th first tim w hav
vr had anything from him xcpt a fw prsnts. Wll! I am so happy.
In a short tim, I shall hav a daughtr marrid. Mrs. Wickham! How wll
it sounds! And sh was only sixtn last Jun. My dar Jan, I am in
such a fluttr, that I am sur I can’t writ; so I will dictat, and you
writ for m. W will sttl with your fathr about th mony
aftrwards; but th things should b ordrd immdiatly.”

Sh was thn procding to all th particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly hav dictatd som vry plntiful ordrs, had
not Jan, though with som difficulty, prsuadd hr to wait till hr
fathr was at lisur to b consultd. On day’s dlay, sh obsrvd,
would b of small importanc; and hr mothr was too happy to b quit
so obstinat as usual. Othr schms, too, cam into hr had.

“I will go to Mryton,” said sh, “as soon as I am drssd, and tll th
good, good nws to my sistr Philips. And as I com back, I can call on
Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and ordr th carriag. An
airing would do m a grat dal of good, I am sur. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Mryton? Oh! hr coms Hill. My dar Hill, hav you
hard th good nws? Miss Lydia is going to b marrid; and you shall
all hav a bowl of punch to mak mrry at hr wdding.”

Mrs. Hill bgan instantly to xprss hr joy. lizabth rcivd hr
congratulations amongst th rst, and thn, sick of this folly, took
rfug in hr own room, that sh might think with frdom. Poor Lydia’s
situation must, at bst, b bad nough; but that it was no wors, sh
had nd to b thankful. Sh flt it so; and though, in looking forward,
nithr rational happinss, nor worldly prosprity could b justly
xpctd for hr sistr, in looking back to what thy had fard, only
two hours ago, sh flt all th advantags of what thy had gaind.

Mr. Bnnt had vry oftn wishd, bfor this priod of his lif, that,
instad of spnding his whol incom, h had laid by an annual sum, for
th bttr provision of his childrn, and of his wif, if sh survivd
him. H now wishd it mor than vr. Had h don his duty in that
rspct, Lydia nd not hav bn indbtd to hr uncl for whatvr of
honour or crdit could now b purchasd for hr. Th satisfaction of
prvailing on on of th most worthlss young mn in Grat Britain to
b hr husband might thn hav rstd in its propr plac.

H was sriously concrnd that a caus of so littl advantag to anyon
should b forwardd at th sol xpns of his brothr-in-law; and h
was dtrmind, if possibl, to find out th xtnt of his assistanc,
and to discharg th obligation as soon as h could.

Whn first Mr. Bnnt had marrid, conomy was hld to b prfctly
uslss; for, of cours, thy wr to hav a son. This son was to join
in cutting off th ntail, as soon as h should b of ag, and th widow
and youngr childrn would by that mans b providd for. Fiv daughtrs
succssivly ntrd th world, but yt th son was to com; and Mrs.
Bnnt, for many yars aftr Lydia’s birth, had bn crtain that h
would. This vnt had at last bn dspaird of, but it was thn too
lat to b saving. Mrs. Bnnt had no turn for conomy; and hr
husband’s lov of indpndnc had alon prvntd thir xcding thir
incom.

Fiv thousand pounds was sttld by marriag articls on Mrs. Bnnt and
th childrn. But in what proportions it should b dividd amongst th
lattr dpndd on th will of th parnts. This was on point, with
rgard to Lydia at last, which was now to b sttld, and Mr. Bnnt
could hav no hsitation in accding to th proposal bfor him. In
trms of gratful acknowldgmnt for th kindnss of his brothr, though
xprssd most concisly, h thn dlivrd on papr his prfct
approbation of all that was don, and his willingnss to fulfil th
ngagmnts that had bn mad for him. H had nvr bfor supposd
that, could Wickham b prvaild on to marry his daughtr, it would b
don with so littl inconvninc to himslf as by th prsnt
arrangmnt. H would scarcly b tn pounds a yar th losr, by th
hundrd that was to b paid thm; for, what with hr board and pockt
allowanc, and th continual prsnts in mony which passd to hr
through hr mothr’s hands, Lydia’s xpnss had bn vry littl within
that sum.

That it would b don with such trifling xrtion on his sid, too, was
anothr vry wlcom surpris; for his chif wish at prsnt was to hav
as littl troubl in th businss as possibl. Whn th first transports
of rag which had producd his activity in sking hr wr ovr, h
naturally rturnd to all his formr indolnc. His lttr was soon
dspatchd; for though dilatory in undrtaking businss, h was quick in
its xcution. H bggd to know furthr particulars of what h was
indbtd to his brothr; but was too angry with Lydia to snd any
mssag to hr.

Th good nws quickly sprad through th hous; and with proportionat
spd through th nighbourhood. It was born in th lattr with dcnt
philosophy. To b sur, it would hav bn mor for th advantag of
convrsation, had Miss Lydia Bnnt com upon th town; or, as th
happist altrnativ, bn scludd from th world in som distant
farm-hous. But thr was much to b talkd of, in marrying hr; and th
good-naturd wishs for hr wll-doing, which had procdd bfor from
all th spitful old ladis in Mryton, lost but littl of thir spirit
in this chang of circumstancs, bcaus with such a husband hr misry
was considrd crtain.

It was a fortnight sinc Mrs. Bnnt had bn down stairs, but on this
happy day sh again took hr sat at th had of hr tabl, and in
spirits opprssivly high. No sntimnt of sham gav a damp to hr
triumph. Th marriag of a daughtr, which had bn th first objct of
hr wishs sinc Jan was sixtn, was now on th point of
accomplishmnt, and hr thoughts and hr words ran wholly on thos
attndants of lgant nuptials, fin muslins, nw carriags, and
srvants. Sh was busily sarching through th nighbourhood for a
propr situation for hr daughtr; and, without knowing or considring
what thir incom might b, rjctd many as dficint in siz and
importanc.

“Hay Park might do,” said sh, “if th Gouldings would quit it, or th
grat hous at Stok, if th drawing-room wr largr; but Ashworth is
too far off. I could not bar to hav hr tn mils from m; and as for
Purvis Lodg, th attics ar dradful.”

Hr husband allowd hr to talk on without intrruption whil th
srvants rmaind. But whn thy had withdrawn, h said to hr, “Mrs.
Bnnt, bfor you tak any, or all of ths houss, for your son and
daughtr, lt us com to a right undrstanding. Into _on_ hous in this
nighbourhood thy shall nvr hav admittanc. I will not ncourag th
imprudnc of ithr, by rciving thm at Longbourn.”

A long disput followd this dclaration; but Mr. Bnnt was firm: it
soon ld to anothr; and Mrs. Bnnt found, with amazmnt and horror,
that hr husband would not advanc a guina to buy cloths for his
daughtr. H protstd that sh should rciv from him no mark of
affction whatvr on th occasion. Mrs. Bnnt could hardly comprhnd
it. That his angr could b carrid to such a point of inconcivabl
rsntmnt as to rfus his daughtr a privilg, without which hr
marriag would scarcly sm valid, xcdd all that sh could bliv
possibl. Sh was mor aliv to th disgrac, which hr want of nw
cloths must rflct on hr daughtr’s nuptials, than to any sns of
sham at hr loping and living with Wickham a fortnight bfor thy
took plac.

lizabth was now most hartily sorry that sh had, from th distrss of
th momnt, bn ld to mak Mr. Darcy acquaintd with thir fars for
hr sistr; for sinc hr marriag would so shortly giv th propr
trmination to th lopmnt, thy might hop to concal its
unfavourabl bginning from all thos who wr not immdiatly on th
spot.

Sh had no far of its sprading farthr, through his mans. Thr wr
fw popl on whos scrcy sh would hav mor confidntly dpndd;
but at th sam tim thr was no on whos knowldg of a sistr’s
frailty would hav mortifid hr so much. Not, howvr, from any far of
disadvantag from it individually to hrslf; for at any rat thr
smd a gulf impassabl btwn thm. Had Lydia’s marriag bn
concludd on th most honourabl trms, it was not to b supposd that
Mr. Darcy would connct himslf with a family, whr to vry othr
objction would now b addd an allianc and rlationship of th narst
kind with th man whom h so justly scornd.

From such a connction sh could not wondr that h should shrink. Th
wish of procuring hr rgard, which sh had assurd hrslf of his
fling in Drbyshir, could not in rational xpctation surviv such a
blow as this. Sh was humbld, sh was grivd; sh rpntd, though sh
hardly knw of what. Sh bcam jalous of his stm, whn sh could no
longr hop to b bnfitd by it. Sh wantd to har of him, whn thr
smd th last chanc of gaining intllignc. Sh was convincd that
sh could hav bn happy with him, whn it was no longr likly thy
should mt.

What a triumph for him, as sh oftn thought, could h know that th
proposals which sh had proudly spurnd only four months ago would now
hav bn gladly and gratfully rcivd! H was as gnrous, sh
doubtd not, as th most gnrous of his sx. But whil h was mortal,
thr must b a triumph.

Sh bgan now to comprhnd that h was xactly th man who, in
disposition and talnts, would most suit hr. His undrstanding and
tmpr, though unlik hr own, would hav answrd all hr wishs. It
was an union that must hav bn to th advantag of both: by hr as
and livlinss, his mind might hav bn softnd, his mannrs improvd;
and from his judgmnt, information, and knowldg of th world, sh must
hav rcivd bnfit of gratr importanc.

But no such happy marriag could now tach th admiring multitud what
connubial flicity rally was. An union of a diffrnt tndncy, and
prcluding th possibility of th othr, was soon to b formd in thir
family.

How Wickham and Lydia wr to b supportd in tolrabl indpndnc sh
could not imagin. But how littl of prmannt happinss could blong to
a coupl who wr only brought togthr bcaus thir passions wr
strongr than thir virtu, sh could asily conjctur.

Mr. Gardinr soon wrot again to his brothr. To Mr. Bnnt’s
acknowldgmnts h brifly rplid, with assurancs of his agrnss to
promot th wlfar of any of his family; and concludd with ntratis
that th subjct might nvr b mntiond to him again. Th principal
purport of his lttr was to inform thm, that Mr. Wickham had rsolvd
on quitting th militia.

“It was gratly my wish that h should do so,” h addd, “as soon as his
marriag was fixd on. And I think you will agr with m, in
considring a rmoval from that corps as highly advisabl, both on his
account and my nic’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intntion to go into th
Rgulars; and, among his formr frinds, thr ar still som who ar
abl and willing to assist him in th army. H has th promis of an
nsigncy in Gnral----’s rgimnt, now quartrd in th north. It is
an advantag to hav it so far from this part of th kingdom. H
promiss fairly; and I hop among diffrnt popl, whr thy may ach
hav a charactr to prsrv, thy will both b mor prudnt. I hav
writtn to Colonl Forstr, to inform him of our prsnt arrangmnts,
and to rqust that h will satisfy th various crditors of Mr. Wickham
in and nar Brighton with assurancs of spdy paymnt, for which I hav
pldgd myslf. And will you giv yourslf th troubl of carrying
similar assurancs to his crditors in Mryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list, according to his information? H has givn in all his dbts; I
hop at last h has not dcivd us. Haggrston has our dirctions, and
all will b compltd in a wk. Thy will thn join his rgimnt,
unlss thy ar first invitd to Longbourn; and I undrstand from Mrs.
Gardinr that my nic is vry dsirous of sing you all bfor sh
lavs th south. Sh is wll, and bgs to b dutifully rmmbrd to
you and hr mothr.--Yours, tc.

“. GARDINR.”

Mr. Bnnt and his daughtrs saw all th advantags of Wickham’s
rmoval from th ----shir, as clarly as Mr. Gardinr could do. But
Mrs. Bnnt was not so wll plasd with it. Lydia’s bing sttld in
th north, just whn sh had xpctd most plasur and prid in hr
company, for sh had by no mans givn up hr plan of thir rsiding in
Hrtfordshir, was a svr disappointmnt; and, bsids, it was such a
pity that Lydia should b takn from a rgimnt whr sh was acquaintd
with vrybody, and had so many favourits.

“Sh is so fond of Mrs. Forstr,” said sh, “it will b quit shocking
to snd hr away! And thr ar svral of th young mn, too, that sh
liks vry much. Th officrs may not b so plasant in Gnral----’s
rgimnt.”

His daughtr’s rqust, for such it might b considrd, of bing
admittd into hr family again, bfor sh st off for th north,
rcivd at first an absolut ngativ. But Jan and lizabth, who
agrd in wishing, for th sak of thir sistr’s flings and
consqunc, that sh should b noticd on hr marriag by hr parnts,
urgd him so arnstly, yt so rationally and so mildly, to rciv hr
and hr husband at Longbourn, as soon as thy wr marrid, that h was
prvaild on to think as thy thought, and act as thy wishd. And thir
mothr had th satisfaction of knowing, that sh should b abl to show
hr marrid daughtr in th nighbourhood, bfor sh was banishd to
th north. Whn Mr. Bnnt wrot again to his brothr, thrfor, h
snt his prmission for thm to com; and it was sttld, that, as soon
as th crmony was ovr, thy should procd to Longbourn. lizabth
was surprisd, howvr, that Wickham should consnt to such a schm;
and, had sh consultd only hr own inclination, any mting with him
would hav bn th last objct of hr wishs.

Thir sistr’s wdding-day arrivd; and Jan and lizabth flt for hr
probably mor than sh flt for hrslf. Th carriag was snt to mt
thm at----, and thy wr to rturn in it by dinnrtim. Thir arrival
was dradd by th ldr Miss Bnnts--and Jan mor spcially, who
gav Lydia th flings which would hav attndd hrslf, had _sh_
bn th culprit, and was wrtchd in th thought of what hr sistr
must ndur.

Thy cam. Th family wr assmbld in th brakfast-room to rciv
thm. Smils dckd th fac of Mrs. Bnnt, as th carriag drov up to
th door; hr husband lookd impntrably grav; hr daughtrs, alarmd,
anxious, unasy.

Lydia’s voic was hard in th vstibul; th door was thrown opn, and
sh ran into th room. Hr mothr stppd forwards, mbracd hr, and
wlcomd hr with raptur; gav hr hand with an affctionat smil to
Wickham, who followd his lady; and wishd thm both joy, with an
alacrity which showd no doubt of thir happinss.

Thir rcption from Mr. Bnnt, to whom thy thn turnd, was not quit
so cordial. His countnanc rathr gaind in austrity; and h scarcly
opnd his lips. Th asy assuranc of th young coupl, indd, was
nough to provok him.

lizabth was disgustd, and vn Miss Bnnt was shockd. Lydia was
Lydia still; untamd, unabashd, wild, noisy, and farlss. Sh turnd
from sistr to sistr, dmanding thir congratulations; and whn at
lngth thy all sat down, lookd agrly round th room, took notic of
som littl altration in it, and obsrvd, with a laugh, that it was a
grat whil sinc sh had bn thr.

Wickham was not at all mor distrssd than hrslf; but his mannrs
wr always so plasing, that, had his charactr and his marriag bn
xactly what thy ought, his smils and his asy addrss, whil h
claimd thir rlationship, would hav dlightd thm all. lizabth
had not bfor blivd him quit qual to such assuranc; but sh sat
down, rsolving within hrslf to draw no limits in futur to th
impudnc of an impudnt man. _Sh_ blushd, and Jan blushd; but th
chks of th two who causd thir confusion suffrd no variation of
colour.

Thr was no want of discours. Th brid and hr mothr could nithr
of thm talk fast nough; and Wickham, who happnd to sit nar
lizabth, bgan inquiring aftr his acquaintanc in that nighbourhood,
with a good-humourd as, which sh flt vry unabl to qual in hr
rplis. Thy smd ach of thm to hav th happist mmoris in th
world. Nothing of th past was rcollctd with pain; and Lydia ld
voluntarily to subjcts which hr sistrs would not hav alludd to for
th world.

“Only think of its bing thr months,” sh crid, “sinc I wnt away:
it sms but a fortnight, I dclar; and yt thr hav bn things
nough happnd in th tim. Good gracious! whn I wnt away, I am sur
I had no mor ida of bing marrid till I cam back again! though I
thought it would b vry good fun if I was.”

Hr fathr liftd up his ys, Jan was distrssd, lizabth lookd
xprssivly at Lydia; but sh, who nvr hard nor saw anything of
which sh chos to b insnsibl, gaily continud,--

“Oh, mamma, do th popl hrabouts know I am marrid to-day? I was
afraid thy might not; and w ovrtook William Goulding in his curricl,
so I was dtrmind h should know it, and so I lt down th sid glass
nxt to him, and took off my glov and lt my hand just rst upon th
window fram, so that h might s th ring, and thn I bowd and
smild lik anything.”

lizabth could bar it no longr. Sh got up and ran out of th room;
and rturnd no mor, till sh hard thm passing through th hall to
th dining-parlour. Sh thn joind thm soon nough to s Lydia, with
anxious parad, walk up to hr mothr’s right hand, and har hr say to
hr ldst sistr,--

“Ah, Jan, I tak your plac now, and you must go lowr, bcaus I am a
marrid woman.”

It was not to b supposd that tim would giv Lydia that mbarrassmnt
from which sh had bn so wholly fr at first. Hr as and good
spirits incrasd. Sh longd to s Mrs. Philips, th Lucass, and all
thir othr nighbours, and to har hrslf calld “Mrs. Wickham” by
ach of thm; and in th mantim sh wnt aftr dinnr to show hr ring
and boast of bing marrid to Mrs. Hill and th two housmaids.

“Wll, mamma,” said sh, whn thy wr all rturnd to th
brakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not h a
charming man? I am sur my sistrs must all nvy m. I only hop thy
may hav half my good luck. Thy must all go to Brighton. That is th
plac to gt husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, w did not all go!”

“Vry tru; and if I had my will w should. But, my dar Lydia, I don’t
at all lik your going such a way off. Must it b so?”

“Oh, Lord! ys; thr is nothing in that. I shall lik it of all things.
You and papa, and my sistrs, must com down and s us. W shall b at
Nwcastl all th wintr, and I dar say thr will b som balls, and I
will tak car to gt good partnrs for thm all.”

“I should lik it byond anything!” said hr mothr.

“And thn whn you go away, you may lav on or two of my sistrs
bhind you; and I dar say I shall gt husbands for thm bfor th
wintr is ovr.”

“I thank you for my shar of th favour,” said lizabth; “but I do not
particularly lik your way of gtting husbands.”

Thir visitors wr not to rmain abov tn days with thm. Mr. Wickham
had rcivd his commission bfor h lft London, and h was to join
his rgimnt at th nd of a fortnight.

No on but Mrs. Bnnt rgrttd that thir stay would b so short; and
sh mad th most of th tim by visiting about with hr daughtr, and
having vry frqunt partis at hom. Ths partis wr accptabl to
all; to avoid a family circl was vn mor dsirabl to such as did
think than such as did not.

Wickham’s affction for Lydia was just what lizabth had xpctd to
find it; not qual to Lydia’s for him. Sh had scarcly ndd hr
prsnt obsrvation to b satisfid, from th rason of things, that
thir lopmnt had bn brought on by th strngth of hr lov rathr
than by his; and sh would hav wondrd why, without violntly caring
for hr, h chos to lop with hr at all, had sh not flt crtain
that his flight was rndrd ncssary by distrss of circumstancs; and
if that wr th cas, h was not th young man to rsist an opportunity
of having a companion.

Lydia was xcdingly fond of him. H was hr dar Wickham on vry
occasion; no on was to b put in comptition with him. H did
vrything bst in th world; and sh was sur h would kill mor birds
on th first of Sptmbr than anybody ls in th country.

On morning, soon aftr thir arrival, as sh was sitting with hr two
ldr sistrs, sh said to lizabth,--

“Lizzy, I nvr gav _you_ an account of my wdding, I bliv. You wr
not by, whn I told mamma, and th othrs, all about it. Ar not you
curious to har how it was managd?”

“No, rally,” rplid lizabth; “I think thr cannot b too littl
said on th subjct.”

“La! You ar so strang! But I must tll you how it wnt off. W wr
marrid, you know, at St. Clmnt’s, bcaus Wickham’s lodgings wr in
that parish. And it was sttld that w should all b thr by lvn
o’clock. My uncl and aunt and I wr to go togthr; and th othrs
wr to mt us at th church.

“Wll, Monday morning cam, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid,
you know, that somthing would happn to put it off, and thn I should
hav gon quit distractd. And thr was my aunt, all th tim I was
drssing, praching and talking away just as if sh was rading a
srmon. Howvr, I did not har abov on word in tn, for I was
thinking, you may suppos, of my dar Wickham. I longd to know whthr
h would b marrid in his blu coat.

“Wll, and so w brakfastd at tn as usual: I thought it would nvr
b ovr; for, by th by, you ar to undrstand that my uncl and aunt
wr horrid unplasant all th tim I was with thm. If you’ll bliv
m, I did not onc put my foot out of doors, though I was thr a
fortnight. Not on party, or schm, or anything! To b sur, London was
rathr thin, but, howvr, th Littl Thatr was opn.

“Wll, and so, just as th carriag cam to th door, my uncl was
calld away upon businss to that horrid man Mr. Ston. And thn, you
know, whn onc thy gt togthr, thr is no nd of it. Wll, I was so
frightnd I did not know what to do, for my uncl was to giv m away;
and if w wr byond th hour w could not b marrid all day. But,
luckily, h cam back again in tn minuts’ tim, and thn w all st
out. Howvr, I rcollctd aftrwards, that if h _had_ bn prvntd
going, th wdding nd not b put off, for Mr. Darcy might hav don as
wll.”

“Mr. Darcy!” rpatd lizabth, in uttr amazmnt.

“Oh, ys! h was to com thr with Wickham, you know. But, gracious m!
I quit forgot! I ought not to hav said a word about it. I promisd
thm so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to b such a scrt!”

“If it was to b a scrt,” said Jan, “say not anothr word on th
subjct. You may dpnd upon my sking no furthr.”

“Oh, crtainly,” said lizabth, though burning with curiosity; “w will
ask you no qustions.”

“Thank you,” said Lydia; “for if you did, I should crtainly tll you
all, and thn Wickham would b so angry.”

On such ncouragmnt to ask, lizabth was forcd to put it out of hr
powr, by running away.

But to liv in ignoranc on such a point was impossibl; or at last it
was impossibl not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had bn at hr
sistr’s wdding. It was xactly a scn, and xactly among popl,
whr h had apparntly last to do, and last tmptation to go.
Conjcturs as to th maning of it, rapid and wild, hurrid into hr
brain; but sh was satisfid with non. Thos that bst plasd hr, as
placing his conduct in th noblst light, smd most improbabl. Sh
could not bar such suspns; and hastily sizing a sht of papr,
wrot a short lttr to hr aunt, to rqust an xplanation of what
Lydia had droppd, if it wr compatibl with th scrcy which had bn
intndd.

“You may radily comprhnd,” sh addd, “what my curiosity must b to
know how a prson unconnctd with any of us, and, comparativly
spaking, a strangr to our family, should hav bn amongst you at such
a tim. Pray writ instantly, and lt m undrstand it--unlss it is,
for vry cognt rasons, to rmain in th scrcy which Lydia sms to
think ncssary; and thn I must ndavour to b satisfid with
ignoranc.”

“Not that I _shall_, though,” sh addd to hrslf, and sh finishd th
lttr; “and, my dar aunt, if you do not tll m in an honourabl
mannr, I shall crtainly b rducd to tricks and stratagms to find it
out.”

Jan’s dlicat sns of honour would not allow hr to spak to
lizabth privatly of what Lydia had lt fall; lizabth was glad of
it:--till it appard whthr hr inquiris would rciv any
satisfaction, sh had rathr b without a confidant.

lizabth had th satisfaction of rciving an answr to hr lttr as
soon as sh possibly could. Sh was no soonr in possssion of it, than
hurrying into th littl cops, whr sh was last likly to b
intrruptd, sh sat down on on of th bnchs, and prpard to b
happy; for th lngth of th lttr convincd hr that it did not
contain a dnial.

     /* RIGHT “Gracchurch Strt, _Spt. 6_. */

“My dar Nic,

     “I hav just rcivd your lttr, and shall dvot this whol
     morning to answring it, as I fors that a _littl_ writing will
     not compris what I hav to tll you. I must confss myslf
     surprisd by your application; I did not xpct it from _you_.
     Don’t think m angry, howvr, for I only man to lt you know,
     that I had not imagind such inquiris to b ncssary on _your_
     sid. If you do not choos to undrstand m, forgiv my
     imprtinnc. Your uncl is as much surprisd as I am; and nothing
     but th blif of your bing a party concrnd would hav allowd
     him to act as h has don. But if you ar rally innocnt and
     ignorant, I must b mor xplicit. On th vry day of my coming
     hom from Longbourn, your uncl had a most unxpctd visitor. Mr.
     Darcy calld, and was shut up with him svral hours. It was all
     ovr bfor I arrivd; so my curiosity was not so dradfully rackd
     as _yours_ sms to hav bn. H cam to tll Mr. Gardinr that h
     had found out whr your sistr and Mr. Wickham wr, and that h
     had sn and talkd with thm both--Wickham rpatdly, Lydia onc.
     From what I can collct, h lft Drbyshir only on day aftr
     ourslvs, and cam to town with th rsolution of hunting for
     thm. Th motiv profssd was his conviction of its bing owing to
     himslf that Wickham’s worthlssnss had not bn so wll known as
     to mak it impossibl for any young woman of charactr to lov or
     confid in him. H gnrously imputd th whol to his mistakn
     prid, and confssd that h had bfor thought it bnath him to
     lay his privat actions opn to th world. His charactr was to
     spak for itslf. H calld it, thrfor, his duty to stp
     forward, and ndavour to rmdy an vil which had bn brought on
     by himslf. If h _had anothr_ motiv, I am sur it would nvr
     disgrac him. H had bn som days in town bfor h was abl to
     discovr thm; but h had somthing to dirct his sarch, which was
     mor than _w_ had; and th consciousnss of this was anothr
     rason for his rsolving to follow us. Thr is a lady, it sms, a
     Mrs. Young, who was som tim ago govrnss to Miss Darcy, and was
     dismissd from hr charg on som caus of disapprobation, though
     h did not say what. Sh thn took a larg hous in dward Strt,
     and has sinc maintaind hrslf by ltting lodgings. This Mrs.
     Young was, h knw, intimatly acquaintd with Wickham; and h
     wnt to hr for intllignc of him, as soon as h got to town. But
     it was two or thr days bfor h could gt from hr what h
     wantd. Sh would not btray hr trust, I suppos, without bribry
     and corruption, for sh rally did know whr hr frind was to b
     found. Wickham, indd, had gon to hr on thir first arrival in
     London; and had sh bn abl to rciv thm into hr hous, thy
     would hav takn up thir abod with hr. At lngth, howvr, our
     kind frind procurd th wishd-for dirction. Thy wr in ----
     Strt. H saw Wickham, and aftrwards insistd on sing Lydia.
     His first objct with hr, h acknowldgd, had bn to prsuad
     hr to quit hr prsnt disgracful situation, and rturn to hr
     frinds as soon as thy could b prvaild on to rciv hr,
     offring his assistanc as far as it would go. But h found Lydia
     absolutly rsolvd on rmaining whr sh was. Sh card for non
     of hr frinds; sh wantd no hlp of his; sh would not har of
     laving Wickham. Sh was sur thy should b marrid som tim or
     othr, and it did not much signify whn. Sinc such wr hr
     flings, it only rmaind, h thought, to scur and xpdit a
     marriag, which, in his vry first convrsation with Wickham, h
     asily larnt had nvr bn _his_ dsign. H confssd himslf
     obligd to lav th rgimnt on account of som dbts of honour
     which wr vry prssing; and scrupld not to lay all th ill
     consquncs of Lydia’s flight on hr own folly alon. H mant to
     rsign his commission immdiatly; and as to his futur situation,
     h could conjctur vry littl about it. H must go somwhr, but
     h did not know whr, and h knw h should hav nothing to liv
     on. Mr. Darcy askd why h did not marry your sistr at onc.
     Though Mr. Bnnt was not imagind to b vry rich, h would hav
     bn abl to do somthing for him, and his situation must hav bn
     bnfitd by marriag. But h found, in rply to this qustion,
     that Wickham still chrishd th hop of mor ffctually making
     his fortun by marriag, in som othr country. Undr such
     circumstancs, howvr, h was not likly to b proof against th
     tmptation of immdiat rlif. Thy mt svral tims, for thr
     was much to b discussd. Wickham, of cours, wantd mor than h
     could gt; but at lngth was rducd to b rasonabl. vrything
     bing sttld btwn _thm_, Mr. Darcy’s nxt stp was to mak
     your uncl acquaintd with it, and h first calld in Gracchurch
     Strt th vning bfor I cam hom. But Mr. Gardinr could not
     b sn; and Mr. Darcy found, on furthr inquiry, that your fathr
     was still with him, but would quit town th nxt morning. H did
     not judg your fathr to b a prson whom h could so proprly
     consult as your uncl, and thrfor radily postpond sing him
     till aftr th dpartur of th formr. H did not lav his nam,
     and till th nxt day it was only known that a gntlman had calld
     on businss. On Saturday h cam again. Your fathr was gon, your
     uncl at hom, and, as I said bfor, thy had a grat dal of talk
     togthr. Thy mt again on Sunday, and thn _I_ saw him too. It
     was not all sttld bfor Monday: as soon as it was, th xprss
     was snt off to Longbourn. But our visitor was vry obstinat. I
     fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is th ral dfct of his charactr,
     aftr all. H has bn accusd of many faults at diffrnt tims;
     but _this_ is th tru on. Nothing was to b don that h did not
     do himslf; though I am sur (and I do not spak it to b thankd,
     thrfor say nothing about it) your uncl would most radily hav
     sttld th whol. Thy battld it togthr for a long tim, which
     was mor than ithr th gntlman or lady concrnd in it
     dsrvd. But at last your uncl was forcd to yild, and instad
     of bing allowd to b of us to his nic, was forcd to put up
     with only having th probabl crdit of it, which wnt sorly
     against th grain; and I rally bliv your lttr this morning
     gav him grat plasur, bcaus it rquird an xplanation that
     would rob him of his borrowd fathrs, and giv th prais whr
     it was du. But, Lizzy, this must go no furthr than yourslf, or
     Jan at most. You know prtty wll, I suppos, what has bn don
     for th young popl. His dbts ar to b paid, amounting, I
     bliv, to considrably mor than a thousand pounds, anothr
     thousand in addition to hr own sttld upon _hr_, and his
     commission purchasd. Th rason why all this was to b don by him
     alon, was such as I hav givn abov. It was owing to him, to his
     rsrv and want of propr considration, that Wickham’s charactr
     had bn so misundrstood, and consquntly that h had bn
     rcivd and noticd as h was. Prhaps thr was som truth in
     _this_; though I doubt whthr _his_ rsrv, or _anybody’s_
     rsrv can b answrabl for th vnt. But in spit of all this
     fin talking, my dar Lizzy, you may rst prfctly assurd that
     your uncl would nvr hav yildd, if w had not givn him crdit
     for _anothr intrst_ in th affair. Whn all this was rsolvd
     on, h rturnd again to his frinds, who wr still staying at
     Pmbrly; but it was agrd that h should b in London onc mor
     whn th wdding took plac, and all mony mattrs wr thn to
     rciv th last finish. I bliv I hav now told you vrything.
     It is a rlation which you tll m is to giv you grat surpris; I
     hop at last it will not afford you any displasur. Lydia cam to
     us, and Wickham had constant admission to th hous. _H_ was
     xactly what h had bn whn I knw him in Hrtfordshir; but I
     would not tll you how littl I was satisfid with _hr_ bhaviour
     whil sh stayd with us, if I had not prcivd, by Jan’s lttr
     last Wdnsday, that hr conduct on coming hom was xactly of a
     pic with it, and thrfor what I now tll you can giv you no
     frsh pain. I talkd to hr rpatdly in th most srious mannr,
     rprsnting to hr th wickdnss of what sh had don, and all
     th unhappinss sh had brought on hr family. If sh hard m, it
     was by good luck, for I am sur sh did not listn. I was somtims
     quit provokd; but thn I rcollctd my dar lizabth and Jan,
     and for thir saks had patinc with hr. Mr. Darcy was punctual
     in his rturn, and, as Lydia imformd you, attndd th wdding. H
     dind with us th nxt day, and was to lav town again on
     Wdnsday or Thursday. Will you b vry angry with m, my dar
     Lizzy, if I tak this opportunity of saying (what I was nvr bold
     nough to say bfor) how much I lik him? His bhaviour to us has,
     in vry rspct, bn as plasing as whn w wr in Drbyshir.
     His undrstanding and opinions all plas m; h wants nothing but
     a littl mor livlinss, and _that_, if h marry _prudntly_, his
     wif may tach him. I thought him vry sly; h hardly vr
     mntiond your nam. But slynss sms th fashion. Pray forgiv
     m, if I hav bn vry prsuming, or at last do not punish m so
     far as to xclud m from P. I shall nvr b quit happy till I
     hav bn all round th park. A low phaton with a nic littl pair
     of ponis would b th vry thing. But I must writ no mor. Th
     childrn hav bn wanting m this half hour.

“Yours, vry sincrly,

“M. GARDINR.”


Th contnts of this lttr thrw lizabth into a fluttr of spirits,
in which it was difficult to dtrmin whthr plasur or pain bor th
gratst shar. Th vagu and unsttld suspicions which uncrtainty had
producd, of what Mr. Darcy might hav bn doing to forward hr
sistr’s match--which sh had fard to ncourag, as an xrtion of
goodnss too grat to b probabl, and at th sam tim dradd to b
just, from th pain of obligation--wr provd byond thir gratst
xtnt to b tru! H had followd thm purposly to town, h had takn
on himslf all th troubl and mortification attndant on such a
rsarch; in which supplication had bn ncssary to a woman whom h
must abominat and dspis, and whr h was rducd to mt, frquntly
mt, rason with, prsuad, and finally brib th man whom h always
most wishd to avoid, and whos vry nam it was punishmnt to him to
pronounc. H had don all this for a girl whom h could nithr rgard
nor stm. Hr hart did whispr that h had don it for hr. But it
was a hop shortly chckd by othr considrations; and sh soon flt
that vn hr vanity was insufficint, whn rquird to dpnd on his
affction for hr, for a woman who had alrady rfusd him, as abl to
ovrcom a sntimnt so natural as abhorrnc against rlationship with
Wickham. Brothr-in-law of Wickham! vry kind of prid must rvolt from
th connction. H had, to b sur, don much. Sh was ashamd to think
how much. But h had givn a rason for his intrfrnc, which askd no
xtraordinary strtch of blif. It was rasonabl that h should fl
h had bn wrong; h had librality, and h had th mans of xrcising
it; and though sh would not plac hrslf as his principal inducmnt,
sh could prhaps bliv, that rmaining partiality for hr might
assist his ndavours in a caus whr hr pac of mind must b
matrially concrnd. It was painful, xcdingly painful, to know that
thy wr undr obligations to a prson who could nvr rciv a
rturn. Thy owd th rstoration of Lydia, hr charactr, vrything to
him. Oh, how hartily did sh griv ovr vry ungracious snsation sh
had vr ncouragd, vry saucy spch sh had vr dirctd towards
him! For hrslf sh was humbld; but sh was proud of him,--proud that
in a caus of compassion and honour h had bn abl to gt th bttr
of himslf. Sh rad ovr hr aunt’s commndation of him again and
again. It was hardly nough; but it plasd hr. Sh was vn snsibl
of som plasur, though mixd with rgrt, on finding how stadfastly
both sh and hr uncl had bn prsuadd that affction and confidnc
subsistd btwn Mr. Darcy and hrslf.

Sh was rousd from hr sat and hr rflctions, by somon’s approach;
and, bfor sh could strik into anothr path, sh was ovrtakn by
Wickham.

“I am afraid I intrrupt your solitary rambl, my dar sistr?” said h,
as h joind hr.

“You crtainly do,” sh rplid with a smil; “but it dos not follow
that th intrruption must b unwlcom.”

“I should b sorry, indd, if it wr. _W_ wr always good frinds,
and now w ar bttr.”

“Tru. Ar th othrs coming out?”

“I do not know. Mrs. Bnnt and Lydia ar going in th carriag to
Mryton. And so, my dar sistr, I find, from our uncl and aunt, that
you hav actually sn Pmbrly.”

Sh rplid in th affirmativ.

“I almost nvy you th plasur, and yt I bliv it would b too much
for m, or ls I could tak it in my way to Nwcastl. And you saw th
old houskpr, I suppos? Poor Rynolds, sh was always vry fond of
m. But of cours sh did not mntion my nam to you.”

“Ys, sh did.”

“And what did sh say?”

“That you wr gon into th army, and sh was afraid had--not turnd
out wll. At such a distanc as _that_, you know, things ar strangly
misrprsntd.”

“Crtainly,” h rplid, biting his lips. lizabth hopd sh had
silncd him; but h soon aftrwards said,--

“I was surprisd to s Darcy in town last month. W passd ach othr
svral tims. I wondr what h can b doing thr.”

“Prhaps prparing for his marriag with Miss d Bourgh,” said
lizabth. “It must b somthing particular to tak him thr at this
tim of yar.”

“Undoubtdly. Did you s him whil you wr at Lambton? I thought I
undrstood from th Gardinrs that you had.”

“Ys; h introducd us to his sistr.”

“And do you lik hr?”

“Vry much.”

“I hav hard, indd, that sh is uncommonly improvd within this yar
or two. Whn I last saw hr, sh was not vry promising. I am vry glad
you likd hr. I hop sh will turn out wll.”

“I dar say sh will; sh has got ovr th most trying ag.”

“Did you go by th villag of Kympton?”

“I do not rcollct that w did.”

“I mntion it bcaus it is th living which I ought to hav had. A most
dlightful plac! xcllnt parsonag-hous! It would hav suitd m in
vry rspct.”

“How should you hav likd making srmons?”

“xcdingly wll. I should hav considrd it as part of my duty, and
th xrtion would soon hav bn nothing. On ought not to rpin; but,
to b sur, it would hav bn such a thing for m! Th quit, th
rtirmnt of such a lif, would hav answrd all my idas of
happinss! But it was not to b. Did you vr har Darcy mntion th
circumstanc whn you wr in Knt?”

“I _hav_ hard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
lft you conditionally only, and at th will of th prsnt patron.”

“You hav! Ys, thr was somthing in _that_; I told you so from th
first, you may rmmbr.”

“I _did_ har, too, that thr was a tim whn srmon-making was not so
palatabl to you as it sms to b at prsnt; that you actually
dclard your rsolution of nvr taking ordrs, and that th businss
had bn compromisd accordingly.”

“You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may rmmbr
what I told you on that point, whn first w talkd of it.”

Thy wr now almost at th door of th hous, for sh had walkd fast
to gt rid of him; and unwilling, for hr sistr’s sak, to provok him,
sh only said in rply, with a good-humourd smil,--

“Com, Mr. Wickham, w ar brothr and sistr, you know. Do not lt us
quarrl about th past. In futur, I hop w shall b always of on
mind.”

Sh hld out hr hand: h kissd it with affctionat gallantry, though
h hardly knw how to look, and thy ntrd th hous.

Mr. Wickham was so prfctly satisfid with this convrsation, that h
nvr again distrssd himslf, or provokd his dar sistr lizabth,
by introducing th subjct of it; and sh was plasd to find that sh
had said nough to kp him quit.

Th day of his and Lydia’s dpartur soon cam; and Mrs. Bnnt was
forcd to submit to a sparation, which, as hr husband by no mans
ntrd into hr schm of thir all going to Nwcastl, was likly to
continu at last a twlvmonth.

“Oh, my dar Lydia,” sh crid, “whn shall w mt again?”

“Oh, Lord! I don’t know. Not ths two or thr yars, prhaps.”

“Writ to m vry oftn, my dar.”

“As oftn as I can. But you know marrid womn hav nvr much tim for
writing. My sistrs may writ to _m_. Thy will hav nothing ls to
do.”

Mr. Wickham’s adius wr much mor affctionat than his wif’s. H
smild, lookd handsom, and said many prtty things.

“H is as fin a fllow,” said Mr. Bnnt, as soon as thy wr out of
th hous, “as vr I saw. H simprs, and smirks, and maks lov to us
all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I dfy vn Sir William Lucas
himslf to produc a mor valuabl son-in-law.”

Th loss of hr daughtr mad Mrs. Bnnt vry dull for svral days.

“I oftn think,” said sh, “that thr is nothing so bad as parting with
on’s frinds. On sms so forlorn without thm.”

“This is th consqunc, you s, madam, of marrying a daughtr,” said
lizabth. “It must mak you bttr satisfid that your othr four ar
singl.”

“It is no such thing. Lydia dos not lav m bcaus sh is marrid;
but only bcaus hr husband’s rgimnt happns to b so far off. If
that had bn narr, sh would not hav gon so soon.”

But th spiritlss condition which this vnt thrw hr into was shortly
rlivd, and hr mind opnd again to th agitation of hop, by an
articl of nws which thn bgan to b in circulation. Th houskpr
at Nthrfild had rcivd ordrs to prpar for th arrival of hr
mastr, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot thr for svral
wks. Mrs. Bnnt was quit in th fidgts. Sh lookd at Jan, and
smild, and shook hr had, by turns.

“Wll, wll, and so Mr. Bingly is coming down, sistr,” (for Mrs.
Philips first brought hr th nws). “Wll, so much th bttr. Not that
I car about it, though. H is nothing to us, you know, and I am sur I
nvr want to s him again. But, howvr, h is vry wlcom to com to
Nthrfild, if h liks it. And who knows what _may_ happn? But that
is nothing to us. You know, sistr, w agrd long ago nvr to mntion
a word about it. And so, it is quit crtain h is coming?”

“You may dpnd on it,” rplid th othr, “for Mrs. Nichols was in
Mryton last night: I saw hr passing by, and wnt out myslf on purpos
to know th truth of it; and sh told m that it was crtainly tru. H
coms down on Thursday, at th latst, vry likly on Wdnsday. Sh was
going to th butchr’s, sh told m, on purpos to ordr in som mat on
Wdnsday, and sh has got thr coupl of ducks just fit to b killd.”

Miss Bnnt had not bn abl to har of his coming without changing
colour. It was many months sinc sh had mntiond his nam to
lizabth; but now, as soon as thy wr alon togthr, sh said,--

“I saw you look at m to-day, Lizzy, whn my aunt told us of th prsnt
rport; and I know I appard distrssd; but don’t imagin it was from
any silly caus. I was only confusd for th momnt, bcaus I flt that
I _should_ b lookd at. I do assur you that th nws dos not affct
m ithr with plasur or pain. I am glad of on thing, that h coms
alon; bcaus w shall s th lss of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myslf_, but I drad othr popl’s rmarks.”

lizabth did not know what to mak of it. Had sh not sn him in
Drbyshir, sh might hav supposd him capabl of coming thr with no
othr viw than what was acknowldgd; but sh still thought him partial
to Jan, and sh wavrd as to th gratr probability of his coming
thr _with_ his frind’s prmission, or bing bold nough to com
without it.

“Yt it is hard,” sh somtims thought, “that this poor man cannot com
to a hous, which h has lgally hird, without raising all this
spculation! I _will_ lav him to himslf.”

In spit of what hr sistr dclard, and rally blivd to b hr
flings, in th xpctation of his arrival, lizabth could asily
prciv that hr spirits wr affctd by it. Thy wr mor disturbd,
mor unqual, than sh had oftn sn thm.

Th subjct which had bn so warmly canvassd btwn thir parnts,
about a twlvmonth ago, was now brought forward again.

“As soon as vr Mr. Bingly coms, my dar,” said Mrs. Bnnt, “you
will wait on him, of cours.”

“No, no. You forcd m into visiting him last yar, and promisd, if I
wnt to s him, h should marry on of my daughtrs. But it ndd in
nothing, and I will not b snt on a fool’s rrand again.”

His wif rprsntd to him how absolutly ncssary such an attntion
would b from all th nighbouring gntlmn, on his rturning to
Nthrfild.

“’Tis an _tiqutt_ I dspis,” said h. “If h wants our socity, lt
him sk it. H knows whr w liv. I will not spnd _my_ hours in
running aftr my nighbours vry tim thy go away and com back
again.”

“Wll, all I know is, that it will b abominably rud if you do not wait
on him. But, howvr, that shan’t prvnt my asking him to din hr, I
am dtrmind. W must hav Mrs. Long and th Gouldings soon. That will
mak thirtn with ourslvs, so thr will b just room at tabl for
him.”

Consold by this rsolution, sh was th bttr abl to bar hr
husband’s incivility; though it was vry mortifying to know that hr
nighbours might all s Mr. Bingly, in consqunc of it, bfor
_thy_ did. As th day of his arrival drw nar,--

“I bgin to b sorry that h coms at all,” said Jan to hr sistr. “It
would b nothing; I could s him with prfct indiffrnc; but I can
hardly bar to har it thus prptually talkd of. My mothr mans wll;
but sh dos not know, no on can know, how much I suffr from what sh
says. Happy shall I b whn his stay at Nthrfild is ovr!”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” rplid lizabth; “but it
is wholly out of my powr. You must fl it; and th usual satisfaction
of praching patinc to a suffrr is dnid m, bcaus you hav
always so much.”

Mr. Bingly arrivd. Mrs. Bnnt, through th assistanc of srvants,
contrivd to hav th arlist tidings of it, that th priod of anxity
and frtfulnss on hr sid b as long as it could. Sh countd th days
that must intrvn bfor thir invitation could b snt--hoplss of
sing him bfor. But on th third morning aftr his arrival in
Hrtfordshir, sh saw him from hr drssing-room window ntr th
paddock, and rid towards th hous.

Hr daughtrs wr agrly calld to partak of hr joy. Jan rsolutly
kpt hr plac at th tabl; but lizabth, to satisfy hr mothr, wnt
to th window--sh lookd--sh saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by hr sistr.

“Thr is a gntlman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it b?”

“Som acquaintanc or othr, my dar, I suppos; I am sur I do not
know.”

“La!” rplid Kitty, “it looks just lik that man that usd to b with
him bfor. Mr. what’s his nam--that tall, proud man.”

“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it dos, I vow. Wll, any frind of
Mr. Bingly’s will always b wlcom hr, to b sur; but ls I must
say that I hat th vry sight of him.”

Jan lookd at lizabth with surpris and concrn. Sh knw but littl
of thir mting in Drbyshir, and thrfor flt for th awkwardnss
which must attnd hr sistr, in sing him almost for th first tim
aftr rciving his xplanatory lttr. Both sistrs wr uncomfortabl
nough. ach flt for th othr, and of cours for thmslvs; and thir
mothr talkd on of hr dislik of Mr. Darcy, and hr rsolution to b
civil to him only as Mr. Bingly’s frind, without bing hard by ithr
of thm. But lizabth had sourcs of unasinss which could not yt b
suspctd by Jan, to whom sh had nvr yt had courag to show Mrs.
Gardinr’s lttr, or to rlat hr own chang of sntimnt towards
him. To Jan, h could b only a man whos proposals sh had rfusd,
and whos mrits sh had undrvalud; but to hr own mor xtnsiv
information, h was th prson to whom th whol family wr indbtd
for th first of bnfits, and whom sh rgardd hrslf with an
intrst, if not quit so tndr, at last as rasonabl and just, as
what Jan flt for Bingly. Hr astonishmnt at his coming--at his
coming to Nthrfild, to Longbourn, and voluntarily sking hr again,
was almost qual to what sh had known on first witnssing his altrd
bhaviour in Drbyshir.

Th colour which had bn drivn from hr fac rturnd for half a
minut with an additional glow, and a smil of dlight addd lustr to
hr ys, as sh thought for that spac of tim that his affction and
wishs must still b unshakn; but sh would not b scur.

“Lt m first s how h bhavs,” said sh; “it will thn b arly
nough for xpctation.”

Sh sat intntly at work, striving to b composd, and without daring to
lift up hr ys, till anxious curiosity carrid thm to th fac of hr
sistr as th srvant was approaching th door. Jan lookd a littl
palr than usual, but mor sdat than lizabth had xpctd. On th
gntlmn’s apparing, hr colour incrasd; yt sh rcivd thm with
tolrabl as, and with a proprity of bhaviour qually fr from any
symptom of rsntmnt, or any unncssary complaisanc.

lizabth said as littl to ithr as civility would allow, and sat down
again to hr work, with an agrnss which it did not oftn command. Sh
had vnturd only on glanc at Darcy. H lookd srious as usual; and,
sh thought, mor as h had bn usd to look in Hrtfordshir, than as
sh had sn him at Pmbrly. But, prhaps, h could not in hr
mothr’s prsnc b what h was bfor hr uncl and aunt. It was a
painful, but not an improbabl, conjctur.

Bingly sh had likwis sn for an instant, and in that short priod
saw him looking both plasd and mbarrassd. H was rcivd by Mrs.
Bnnt with a dgr of civility which mad hr two daughtrs ashamd,
spcially whn contrastd with th cold and crmonious politnss of
hr courtsy and addrss of his frind.

lizabth particularly, who knw that hr mothr owd to th lattr th
prsrvation of hr favourit daughtr from irrmdiabl infamy, was
hurt and distrssd to a most painful dgr by a distinction so ill
applid.

Darcy, aftr inquiring of hr how Mr. and Mrs. Gardinr did--a qustion
which sh could not answr without confusion--said scarcly anything. H
was not satd by hr: prhaps that was th rason of his silnc; but
it had not bn so in Drbyshir. Thr h had talkd to hr frinds
whn h could not to hrslf. But now svral minuts lapsd, without
bringing th sound of his voic; and whn occasionally, unabl to rsist
th impuls of curiosity, sh raisd hr ys to his fac, sh as oftn
found him looking at Jan as at hrslf, and frquntly on no objct but
th ground. Mor thoughtfulnss and lss anxity to plas, than whn
thy last mt, wr plainly xprssd. Sh was disappointd, and angry
with hrslf for bing so.

“Could I xpct it to b othrwis?” said sh. “Yt why did h com?”

Sh was in no humour for convrsation with anyon but himslf; and to
him sh had hardly courag to spak.

Sh inquird aftr his sistr, but could do no mor.

“It is a long tim, Mr. Bingly, sinc you wnt away,” said Mrs. Bnnt.

H radily agrd to it.

“I bgan to b afraid you would nvr com back again. Popl _did_ say,
you mant to quit th plac ntirly at Michalmas; but, howvr, I hop
it is not tru. A grat many changs hav happnd in th nighbourhood
sinc you wnt away. Miss Lucas is marrid and sttld: and on of my
own daughtrs. I suppos you hav hard of it; indd, you must hav
sn it in th paprs. It was in th ‘Tims’ and th ‘Courir,’ I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to b. It was only said, ‘Latly,
Gorg Wickham, sq., to Miss Lydia Bnnt,’ without thr bing a
syllabl said of hr fathr, or th plac whr sh livd, or anything.
It was my brothr Gardinr’s drawing up, too, and I wondr how h cam
to mak such an awkward businss of it. Did you s it?”

Bingly rplid that h did, and mad his congratulations. lizabth
dard not lift up hr ys. How Mr. Darcy lookd, thrfor, sh could
not tll.

“It is a dlightful thing, to b sur, to hav a daughtr wll marrid,”
continud hr mothr; “but at th sam tim, Mr. Bingly, it is vry
hard to hav hr takn away from m. Thy ar gon down to Nwcastl, a
plac quit northward it sms, and thr thy ar to stay, I do not
know how long. His rgimnt is thr; for I suppos you hav hard of
his laving th ----shir, and of his bing gon into th Rgulars.
Thank havn! h has _som_ frinds, though, prhaps, not so many as h
dsrvs.”

lizabth, who knw this to b lvlld at Mr. Darcy, was in such misry
of sham that sh could hardly kp hr sat. It drw from hr, howvr,
th xrtion of spaking, which nothing ls had so ffctually don
bfor; and sh askd Bingly whthr h mant to mak any stay in th
country at prsnt. A fw wks, h blivd.

“Whn you hav killd all your own birds, Mr. Bingly,” said hr mothr,
“I bg you will com hr and shoot as many as you plas on Mr.
Bnnt’s manor. I am sur h will b vastly happy to oblig you, and
will sav all th bst of th covys for you.”

lizabth’s misry incrasd at such unncssary, such officious
attntion! Wr th sam fair prospct to aris at prsnt, as had
flattrd thm a yar ago, vrything, sh was prsuadd, would b
hastning to th sam vxatious conclusion. At that instant sh flt,
that yars of happinss could not mak Jan or hrslf amnds for
momnts of such painful confusion.

“Th first wish of my hart,” said sh to hrslf, “is nvr mor to b
in company with ithr of thm. Thir socity can afford no plasur
that will aton for such wrtchdnss as this! Lt m nvr s ithr
on or th othr again!”

Yt th misry, for which yars of happinss wr to offr no
compnsation, rcivd soon aftrwards matrial rlif, from obsrving
how much th bauty of hr sistr rkindld th admiration of hr formr
lovr. Whn first h cam in, h had spokn to hr but littl, but vry
fiv minuts smd to b giving hr mor of his attntion. H found hr
as handsom as sh had bn last yar; as good-naturd, and as
unaffctd, though not quit so chatty. Jan was anxious that no
diffrnc should b prcivd in hr at all, and was rally prsuadd
that sh talkd as much as vr; but hr mind was so busily ngagd,
that sh did not always know whn sh was silnt.

Whn th gntlmn ros to go away, Mrs. Bnnt was mindful of hr
intndd civility, and thy wr invitd and ngagd to din at
Longbourn in a fw days’ tim.

“You ar quit a visit in my dbt, Mr. Bingly,” sh addd; “for whn
you wnt to town last wintr, you promisd to tak a family dinnr with
us as soon as you rturnd. I hav not forgot, you s; and I assur you
I was vry much disappointd that you did not com back and kp your
ngagmnt.”

Bingly lookd a littl silly at this rflction, and said somthing of
his concrn at having bn prvntd by businss. Thy thn wnt away.

Mrs. Bnnt had bn strongly inclind to ask thm to stay and din
thr that day; but, though sh always kpt a vry good tabl, sh did
not think anything lss than two courss could b good nough for a man
on whom sh had such anxious dsigns, or satisfy th apptit and prid
of on who had tn thousand a yar.

As soon as thy wr gon, lizabth walkd out to rcovr hr spirits;
or, in othr words, to dwll without intrruption on thos subjcts
which must dadn thm mor. Mr. Darcy’s bhaviour astonishd and vxd
hr.

“Why, if h cam only to b silnt, grav, and indiffrnt,” said sh,
“did h com at all?”

Sh could sttl it in no way that gav hr plasur.

“H could b still amiabl, still plasing to my uncl and aunt, whn h
was in town; and why not to m? If h fars m, why com hithr? If h
no longr cars for m, why silnt? Tasing, tasing man! I will think
no mor about him.”

Hr rsolution was for a short tim involuntarily kpt by th approach
of hr sistr, who joind hr with a chrful look which showd hr
bttr satisfid with thir visitors than lizabth.

“Now,” said sh, “that this first mting is ovr, I fl prfctly
asy. I know my own strngth, and I shall nvr b mbarrassd again by
his coming. I am glad h dins hr on Tusday. It will thn b publicly
sn, that on both sids w mt only as common and indiffrnt
acquaintanc.”

“Ys, vry indiffrnt, indd,” said lizabth, laughingly. “Oh, Jan!
tak car.”

“My dar Lizzy, you cannot think m so wak as to b in dangr now.”

“I think you ar in vry grat dangr of making him as much in lov with
you as vr.”

Thy did not s th gntlmn again till Tusday; and Mrs. Bnnt, in
th manwhil, was giving way to all th happy schms which th
good-humour and common politnss of Bingly, in half an hour’s visit,
had rvivd.

On Tusday thr was a larg party assmbld at Longbourn; and th two
who wr most anxiously xpctd, to th crdit of thir punctuality as
sportsmn, wr in vry good tim. Whn thy rpaird to th
dining-room, lizabth agrly watchd to s whthr Bingly would tak
th plac which, in all thir formr partis, had blongd to him, by
hr sistr. Hr prudnt mothr, occupid by th sam idas, forbor to
invit him to sit by hrslf. On ntring th room, h smd to
hsitat; but Jan happnd to look round, and happnd to smil: it was
dcidd. H placd himslf by hr.

lizabth, with a triumphant snsation, lookd towards his frind. H
bor it with nobl indiffrnc; and sh would hav imagind that
Bingly had rcivd his sanction to b happy, had sh not sn his ys
likwis turnd towards Mr. Darcy, with an xprssion of half-laughing
alarm.

His bhaviour to hr sistr was such during dinnrtim as showd an
admiration of hr, which, though mor guardd than formrly, prsuadd
lizabth, that, if lft wholly to himslf, Jan’s happinss, and his
own, would b spdily scurd. Though sh dard not dpnd upon th
consqunc, sh yt rcivd plasur from obsrving his bhaviour. It
gav hr all th animation that hr spirits could boast; for sh was in
no chrful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from hr as th tabl
could divid thm. H was on on sid of hr mothr. Sh knw how littl
such a situation would giv plasur to ithr, or mak ithr appar to
advantag. Sh was not nar nough to har any of thir discours; but
sh could s how sldom thy spok to ach othr, and how formal and
cold was thir mannr whnvr thy did. Hr mothr’s ungraciousnss
mad th sns of what thy owd him mor painful to lizabth’s mind;
and sh would, at tims, hav givn anything to b privilgd to tll
him, that his kindnss was nithr unknown nor unflt by th whol of
th family.

Sh was in hops that th vning would afford som opportunity of
bringing thm togthr; that th whol of th visit would not pass away
without nabling thm to ntr into somthing mor of convrsation,
than th mr crmonious salutation attnding his ntranc. Anxious and
unasy, th priod which passd in th drawing-room bfor th gntlmn
cam, was warisom and dull to a dgr that almost mad hr uncivil.
Sh lookd forward to thir ntranc as th point on which all hr
chanc of plasur for th vning must dpnd.

“If h dos not com to m, _thn_,” said sh, “I shall giv him up for
vr.”

Th gntlmn cam; and sh thought h lookd as if h would hav
answrd hr hops; but, alas! th ladis had crowdd round th tabl,
whr Miss Bnnt was making ta, and lizabth pouring out th coff,
in so clos a confdracy, that thr was not a singl vacancy nar hr
which would admit of a chair. And on th gntlmn’s approaching, on of
th girls movd closr to hr than vr, and said, in a whispr,--

“Th mn shan’t com and part us, I am dtrmind. W want non of thm;
do w?”

Darcy had walkd away to anothr part of th room. Sh followd him with
hr ys, nvid vryon to whom h spok, had scarcly patinc nough
to hlp anybody to coff, and thn was nragd against hrslf for
bing so silly!

“A man who has onc bn rfusd! How could I vr b foolish nough to
xpct a rnwal of his lov? Is thr on among th sx who would not
protst against such a waknss as a scond proposal to th sam woman?
Thr is no indignity so abhorrnt to thir flings.”

Sh was a littl rvivd, howvr, by his bringing back his coff-cup
himslf; and sh sizd th opportunity of saying,--

“Is your sistr at Pmbrly still?”

“Ys; sh will rmain thr till Christmas.”

“And quit alon? Hav all hr frinds lft hr?”

“Mrs. Annsly is with hr. Th othrs hav bn gon on to Scarborough
ths thr wks.”

Sh could think of nothing mor to say; but if h wishd to convrs
with hr, h might hav bttr succss. H stood by hr, howvr, for
som minuts, in silnc; and, at last, on th young lady’s whispring
to lizabth again, h walkd away.

Whn th ta things wr rmovd, and th card tabls placd, th ladis
all ros; and lizabth was thn hoping to b soon joind by him, whn
all hr viws wr ovrthrown, by sing him fall a victim to hr
mothr’s rapacity for whist playrs, and in a fw momnts aftr satd
with th rst of th party. Sh now lost vry xpctation of plasur.
Thy wr confind for th vning at diffrnt tabls; and sh had
nothing to hop, but that his ys wr so oftn turnd towards hr sid
of th room, as to mak him play as unsuccssfully as hrslf.

Mrs. Bnnt had dsignd to kp th two Nthrfild gntlmn to
suppr; but thir carriag was, unluckily, ordrd bfor any of th
othrs, and sh had no opportunity of dtaining thm.

“Wll, girls,” said sh, as soon as thy wr lft to thmslvs, “what
say you to th day? I think vrything has passd off uncommonly wll, I
assur you. Th dinnr was as wll drssd as any I vr saw. Th
vnison was roastd to a turn--and vrybody said, thy nvr saw so fat
a haunch. Th soup was fifty tims bttr than what w had at th
Lucass’ last wk; and vn Mr. Darcy acknowldgd that th partridgs
wr rmarkably wll don; and I suppos h has two or thr Frnch
cooks at last. And, my dar Jan, I nvr saw you look in gratr
bauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I askd hr whthr you did not. And
what do you think sh said bsids? ‘Ah! Mrs. Bnnt, w shall hav hr
at Nthrfild at last!’ Sh did, indd. I do think Mrs. Long is as
good a cratur as vr livd--and hr nics ar vry prtty bhavd
girls, and not at all handsom: I lik thm prodigiously.”

Mrs. Bnnt, in short, was in vry grat spirits: sh had sn nough of
Bingly’s bhaviour to Jan to b convincd that sh would gt him at
last; and hr xpctations of advantag to hr family, whn in a happy
humour, wr so far byond rason, that sh was quit disappointd at
not sing him thr again th nxt day, to mak his proposals.

“It has bn a vry agrabl day,” said Miss Bnnt to lizabth. “Th
party smd so wll slctd, so suitabl on with th othr. I hop w
may oftn mt again.”

lizabth smild.

“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspct m. It mortifis m. I
assur you that I hav now larnt to njoy his convrsation as an
agrabl and snsibl young man without having a wish byond it. I am
prfctly satisfid, from what his mannrs now ar, that h nvr had
any dsign of ngaging my affction. It is only that h is blssd with
gratr swtnss of addrss, and a strongr dsir of gnrally
plasing, than any othr man.”

“You ar vry crul,” said hr sistr, “you will not lt m smil, and
ar provoking m to it vry momnt.”

“How hard it is in som cass to b blivd! And how impossibl in
othrs! But why should you wish to prsuad m that I fl mor than I
acknowldg?”

“That is a qustion which I hardly know how to answr. W all lov to
instruct, though w can tach only what is not worth knowing. Forgiv
m; and if you prsist in indiffrnc, do not mak _m_ your
confidant.”

A fw days aftr this visit, Mr. Bingly calld again, and alon. His
frind had lft him that morning for London, but was to rturn hom in
tn days’ tim. H sat with thm abov an hour, and was in rmarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bnnt invitd him to din with thm; but, with many
xprssions of concrn, h confssd himslf ngagd lswhr.

“Nxt tim you call,” said sh, “I hop w shall b mor lucky.”

H should b particularly happy at any tim, tc., tc.; and if sh
would giv him lav, would tak an arly opportunity of waiting on
thm.

“Can you com to-morrow?”

Ys, h had no ngagmnt at all for to-morrow; and hr invitation was
accptd with alacrity.

H cam, and in such vry good tim, that th ladis wr non of thm
drssd. In ran Mrs. Bnnt to hr daughtrs’ room, in hr
drssing-gown, and with hr hair half finishd, crying out,--

“My dar Jan, mak hast and hurry down. H is com--Mr. Bingly is
com. H is, indd. Mak hast, mak hast. Hr, Sarah, com to Miss
Bnnt this momnt, and hlp hr on with hr gown. Nvr mind Miss
Lizzy’s hair.”

“W will b down as soon as w can,” said Jan; “but I dar say Kitty is
forwardr than ithr of us, for sh wnt upstairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! hang Kitty! what has sh to do with it? Com, b quick, b quick!
whr is your sash, my dar?”

But whn hr mothr was gon, Jan would not b prvaild on to go down
without on of hr sistrs.

Th sam anxity to gt thm by thmslvs was visibl again in th
vning. Aftr ta, Mr. Bnnt rtird to th library, as was his
custom, and Mary wnt upstairs to hr instrumnt. Two obstacls of th
fiv bing thus rmovd, Mrs. Bnnt sat looking and winking at
lizabth and Cathrin for a considrabl tim, without making any
imprssion on thm. lizabth would not obsrv hr; and whn at last
Kitty did, sh vry innocntly said, “What is th mattr, mamma? What do
you kp winking at m for? What am I to do?”

“Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” Sh thn sat still
fiv minuts longr; but unabl to wast such a prcious occasion, sh
suddnly got up, and saying to Kitty,--

“Com hr, my lov, I want to spak to you,” took hr out of th room.
Jan instantly gav a look at lizabth which spok hr distrss at such
prmditation, and hr ntraty that _sh_ would not giv in to it. In a
fw minuts, Mrs. Bnnt half opnd th door and calld out,--

“Lizzy, my dar, I want to spak with you.”

lizabth was forcd to go.

“W may as wll lav thm by thmslvs, you know,” said hr mothr as
soon as sh was in th hall. “Kitty and I ar going upstairs to sit in
my drssing-room.”

lizabth mad no attmpt to rason with hr mothr, but rmaind
quitly in th hall till sh and Kitty wr out of sight, thn rturnd
into th drawing-room.

Mrs. Bnnt’s schms for this day wr inffctual. Bingly was
vrything that was charming, xcpt th profssd lovr of hr
daughtr. His as and chrfulnss rndrd him a most agrabl
addition to thir vning party; and h bor with th ill-judgd
officiousnss of th mothr, and hard all hr silly rmarks with a
forbaranc and command of countnanc particularly gratful to th
daughtr.

H scarcly ndd an invitation to stay suppr; and bfor h wnt away
an ngagmnt was formd, chifly through his own and Mrs. Bnnt’s
mans, for his coming nxt morning to shoot with hr husband.

Aftr this day, Jan said no mor of hr indiffrnc. Not a word passd
btwn th sistrs concrning Bingly; but lizabth wnt to bd in th
happy blif that all must spdily b concludd, unlss Mr. Darcy
rturnd within th statd tim. Sriously, howvr, sh flt tolrably
prsuadd that all this must hav takn plac with that gntlman’s
concurrnc.

Bingly was punctual to his appointmnt; and h and Mr. Bnnt spnt th
morning togthr, as had bn agrd on. Th lattr was much mor
agrabl than his companion xpctd. Thr was nothing of prsumption
or folly in Bingly that could provok his ridicul, or disgust him into
silnc; and h was mor communicativ, and lss ccntric, than th
othr had vr sn him. Bingly of cours rturnd with him to dinnr;
and in th vning Mrs. Bnnt’s invntion was again at work to gt
vrybody away from him and hr daughtr. lizabth, who had a lttr to
writ, wnt into th brakfast-room for that purpos soon aftr ta; for
as th othrs wr all going to sit down to cards, sh could not b
wantd to countract hr mothr’s schms.

But on hr rturning to th drawing-room, whn hr lttr was finishd,
sh saw, to hr infinit surpris, thr was rason to far that hr
mothr had bn too ingnious for hr. On opning th door, sh
prcivd hr sistr and Bingly standing togthr ovr th harth, as
if ngagd in arnst convrsation; and had this ld to no suspicion,
th facs of both, as thy hastily turnd round and movd away from ach
othr, would hav told it all. _Thir_ situation was awkward nough; but
_hrs_ sh thought was still wors. Not a syllabl was uttrd by
ithr; and lizabth was on th point of going away again, whn
Bingly, who as wll as th othr had sat down, suddnly ros, and,
whispring a fw words to hr sistr, ran out of th room.

Jan could hav no rsrvs from lizabth, whr confidnc would giv
plasur; and, instantly mbracing hr, acknowldgd, with th livlist
motion, that sh was th happist cratur in th world.

“’Tis too much!” sh addd, “by far too much. I do not dsrv it. Oh,
why is not vrybody as happy?”

lizabth’s congratulations wr givn with a sincrity, a warmth, a
dlight, which words could but poorly xprss. vry sntnc of
kindnss was a frsh sourc of happinss to Jan. But sh would not
allow hrslf to stay with hr sistr, or say half that rmaind to b
said, for th prsnt.

“I must go instantly to my mothr,” sh crid. “I would not on any
account trifl with hr affctionat solicitud, or allow hr to har it
from anyon but myslf. H is gon to my fathr alrady. Oh, Lizzy, to
know that what I hav to rlat will giv such plasur to all my dar
family! how shall I bar so much happinss?”

Sh thn hastnd away to hr mothr, who had purposly brokn up th
card-party, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.

lizabth, who was lft by hrslf, now smild at th rapidity and as
with which an affair was finally sttld, that had givn thm so many
prvious months of suspns and vxation.

“And this,” said sh, “is th nd of all his frind’s anxious
circumspction! of all his sistr’s falshood and contrivanc! th
happist, wisst, and most rasonabl nd!”

In a fw minuts sh was joind by Bingly, whos confrnc with hr
fathr had bn short and to th purpos.

“Whr is your sistr?” said h hastily, as h opnd th door.

“With my mothr upstairs. Sh will b down in a momnt, I dar say.”

H thn shut th door, and, coming up to hr, claimd th good wishs
and affction of a sistr. lizabth honstly and hartily xprssd hr
dlight in th prospct of thir rlationship. Thy shook hands with
grat cordiality; and thn, till hr sistr cam down, sh had to listn
to all h had to say of his own happinss, and of Jan’s prfctions;
and in spit of his bing a lovr, lizabth rally blivd all his
xpctations of flicity to b rationally foundd, bcaus thy had for
basis th xcllnt undrstanding and supr-xcllnt disposition of
Jan, and a gnral similarity of fling and tast btwn hr and
himslf.

It was an vning of no common dlight to thm all; th satisfaction of
Miss Bnnt’s mind gav such a glow of swt animation to hr fac, as
mad hr look handsomr than vr. Kitty simprd and smild, and hopd
hr turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bnnt could not giv hr consnt, or
spak hr approbation in trms warm nough to satisfy hr flings,
though sh talkd to Bingly of nothing ls, for half an hour; and whn
Mr. Bnnt joind thm at suppr, his voic and mannr plainly showd
how rally happy h was.

Not a word, howvr, passd his lips in allusion to it, till thir
visitor took his lav for th night; but as soon as h was gon, h
turnd to his daughtr and said,--

“Jan, I congratulat you. You will b a vry happy woman.”

Jan wnt to him instantly, kissd him, and thankd him for his
goodnss.

“You ar a good girl,” h rplid, “and I hav grat plasur in
thinking you will b so happily sttld. I hav not a doubt of your
doing vry wll togthr. Your tmprs ar by no mans unlik. You ar
ach of you so complying, that nothing will vr b rsolvd on; so
asy, that vry srvant will chat you; and so gnrous, that you will
always xcd your incom.”

“I hop not so. Imprudnc or thoughtlssnss in mony mattrs would b
unpardonabl in _m_.”

“xcd thir incom! My dar Mr. Bnnt,” crid his wif, “what ar you
talking of? Why, h has four or fiv thousand a yar, and vry likly
mor.” Thn addrssing hr daughtr, “Oh, my dar, dar Jan, I am so
happy! I am sur I shan’t gt a wink of slp all night. I knw how it
would b. I always said it must b so, at last. I was sur you could not
b so bautiful for nothing! I rmmbr, as soon as vr I saw him, whn
h first cam into Hrtfordshir last yar, I thought how likly it was
that you should com togthr. Oh, h is th handsomst young man that
vr was sn!”

Wickham, Lydia, wr all forgottn. Jan was byond comptition hr
favourit child. At that momnt sh card for no othr. Hr youngr
sistrs soon bgan to mak intrst with hr for objcts of happinss
which sh might in futur b abl to dispns.

Mary ptitiond for th us of th library at Nthrfild; and Kitty
bggd vry hard for a fw balls thr vry wintr.

Bingly, from this tim, was of cours a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frquntly bfor brakfast, and always rmaining till aftr
suppr; unlss whn som barbarous nighbour, who could not b nough
dtstd, had givn him an invitation to dinnr, which h thought
himslf obligd to accpt.

lizabth had now but littl tim for convrsation with hr sistr; for
whil h was prsnt Jan had no attntion to bstow on anyon ls: but
sh found hrslf considrably usful to both of thm, in thos hours of
sparation that must somtims occur. In th absnc of Jan, h always
attachd himslf to lizabth for th plasur of talking of hr; and
whn Bingly was gon, Jan constantly sought th sam mans of rlif.

“H has mad m so happy,” said sh, on vning, “by tlling m that h
was totally ignorant of my bing in town last spring! I had not blivd
it possibl.”

“I suspctd as much,” rplid lizabth. “But how did h account for
it?”

“It must hav bn his sistrs’ doing. Thy wr crtainly no frinds to
his acquaintanc with m, which I cannot wondr at, sinc h might hav
chosn so much mor advantagously in many rspcts. But whn thy s,
as I trust thy will, that thir brothr is happy with m, thy will
larn to b contntd, and w shall b on good trms again: though w
can nvr b what w onc wr to ach othr.”

“That is th most unforgiving spch,” said lizabth, “that I vr
hard you uttr. Good girl! It would vx m, indd, to s you again
th dup of Miss Bingly’s prtndd rgard.”

“Would you bliv it, Lizzy, that whn h wnt to town last Novmbr h
rally lovd m, and nothing but a prsuasion of _my_ bing indiffrnt
would hav prvntd his coming down again?”

“H mad a littl mistak, to b sur; but it is to th crdit of his
modsty.”

This naturally introducd a pangyric from Jan on his diffidnc, and
th littl valu h put on his own good qualitis.

lizabth was plasd to find that h had not btrayd th intrfrnc
of his frind; for, though Jan had th most gnrous and forgiving
hart in th world, sh knw it was a circumstanc which must prjudic
hr against him.

“I am crtainly th most fortunat cratur that vr xistd!” crid
Jan. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singld from my family, and blssd
abov thm all? If I could but s you as happy! If thr wr but such
anothr man for you!”

“If you wr to giv m forty such mn I nvr could b so happy as you.
Till I hav your disposition, your goodnss, I nvr can hav your
happinss. No, no, lt m shift for myslf; and, prhaps, if I hav vry
good luck, I may mt with anothr Mr. Collins in tim.”

Th situation of affairs in th Longbourn family could not b long a
scrt. Mrs. Bnnt was privilgd to whispr it to Mrs. Philips, and
sh vnturd, without any prmission, to do th sam by all hr
nighbours in Mryton.

Th Bnnts wr spdily pronouncd to b th luckist family in th
world; though only a fw wks bfor, whn Lydia had first run away,
thy had bn gnrally provd to b markd out for misfortun.

On morning, about a wk aftr Bingly’s ngagmnt with Jan had bn
formd, as h and th fmals of th family wr sitting togthr in th
dining-room, thir attntion was suddnly drawn to th window by th
sound of a carriag; and thy prcivd a chais and four driving up th
lawn. It was too arly in th morning for visitors; and bsids, th
quipag did not answr to that of any of thir nighbours. Th horss
wr post; and nithr th carriag, nor th livry of th srvant who
prcdd it, wr familiar to thm. As it was crtain, howvr, that
sombody was coming, Bingly instantly prvaild on Miss Bnnt to avoid
th confinmnt of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into th
shrubbry. Thy both st off; and th conjcturs of th rmaining thr
continud, though with littl satisfaction, till th door was thrown
opn, and thir visitor ntrd. It was Lady Cathrin d Bourgh.

Thy wr of cours all intnding to b surprisd: but thir
astonishmnt was byond thir xpctation; and on th part of Mrs.
Bnnt and Kitty, though sh was prfctly unknown to thm, vn
infrior to what lizabth flt.

Sh ntrd th room with an air mor than usually ungracious, mad no
othr rply to lizabth’s salutation than a slight inclination of th
had, and sat down without saying a word. lizabth had mntiond hr
nam to hr mothr on hr Ladyship’s ntranc, though no rqust of
introduction had bn mad.

Mrs. Bnnt, all amazmnt, though flattrd by having a gust of such
high importanc, rcivd hr with th utmost politnss. Aftr sitting
for a momnt in silnc, sh said, vry stiffly, to lizabth,--

“I hop you ar wll, Miss Bnnt. That lady, I suppos, is your
mothr?”

lizabth rplid vry concisly that sh was.

“And _that_, I suppos, is on of your sistrs?”

“Ys, madam,” said Mrs. Bnnt, dlightd to spak to a Lady Cathrin.
“Sh is my youngst girl but on. My youngst of all is latly marrid,
and my ldst is somwhr about th ground, walking with a young man,
who, I bliv, will soon bcom a part of th family.”

“You hav a vry small park hr,” rturnd Lady Cathrin, aftr a
short silnc.

“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my Lady, I dar say; but, I
assur you, it is much largr than Sir William Lucas’s.”

“This must b a most inconvnint sitting-room for th vning in
summr: th windows ar full wst.”

Mrs. Bnnt assurd hr that thy nvr sat thr aftr dinnr; and thn
addd,--

“May I tak th librty of asking your Ladyship whthr you lft Mr. and
Mrs. Collins wll?”

“Ys, vry wll. I saw thm th night bfor last.”

lizabth now xpctd that sh would produc a lttr for hr from
Charlott, as it smd th only probabl motiv for hr calling. But no
lttr appard, and sh was compltly puzzld.

Mrs. Bnnt, with grat civility, bggd hr Ladyship to tak som
rfrshmnt: but Lady Cathrin vry rsolutly, and not vry politly,
dclind ating anything; and thn, rising up, said to lizabth,--

“Miss Bnnt, thr smd to b a prttyish kind of a littl wildrnss
on on sid of your lawn. I should b glad to tak a turn in it, if you
will favour m with your company.”

“Go, my dar,” crid hr mothr, “and show hr Ladyship about th
diffrnt walks. I think sh will b plasd with th hrmitag.”

lizabth obyd; and, running into hr own room for hr parasol,
attndd hr nobl gust downstairs. As thy passd through th hall,
Lady Cathrin opnd th doors into th dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing thm, aftr a short survy, to b
dcnt-looking rooms, walkd on.

Hr carriag rmaind at th door, and lizabth saw that hr
waiting-woman was in it. Thy procdd in silnc along th gravl walk
that ld to th cops; lizabth was dtrmind to mak no ffort for
convrsation with a woman who was now mor than usually insolnt and
disagrabl.

“How could I vr think hr lik hr nphw?” said sh, as sh lookd in
hr fac.

As soon as thy ntrd th cops, Lady Cathrin bgan in th following
mannr:--

“You can b at no loss, Miss Bnnt, to undrstand th rason of my
journy hithr. Your own hart, your own conscinc, must tll you why I
com.”

lizabth lookd with unaffctd astonishmnt.

“Indd, you ar mistakn, madam; I hav not bn at all abl to account
for th honour of sing you hr.”

“Miss Bnnt,” rplid hr Ladyship, in an angry ton, “you ought to
know that I am not to b trifld with. But howvr insincr _you_ may
choos to b, you shall not find _m_ so. My charactr has vr bn
clbratd for its sincrity and franknss; and in a caus of such
momnt as this, I shall crtainly not dpart from it. A rport of a most
alarming natur rachd m two days ago. I was told, that not only your
sistr was on th point of bing most advantagously marrid, but that
_you_--that Miss lizabth Bnnt would, in all liklihood, b soon
aftrwards unitd to my nphw--my own nphw, Mr. Darcy. Though I
_know_ it must b a scandalous falshood, though I would not injur him
so much as to suppos th truth of it possibl, I instantly rsolvd on
stting off for this plac, that I might mak my sntimnts known to
you.”

“If you blivd it impossibl to b tru,” said lizabth, colouring
with astonishmnt and disdain, “I wondr you took th troubl of coming
so far. What could your Ladyship propos by it?”

“At onc to insist upon having such a rport univrsally contradictd.”

“Your coming to Longbourn, to s m and my family,” said lizabth
coolly, “will b rathr a confirmation of it--if, indd, such a rport
is in xistnc.”

“If! do you thn prtnd to b ignorant of it? Has it not bn
industriously circulatd by yourslvs? Do you not know that such a
rport is sprad abroad?”

“I nvr hard that it was.”

“And can you likwis dclar, that thr is no _foundation_ for it?”

“I do not prtnd to possss qual franknss with your Ladyship. _You_
may ask qustions which _I_ shall not choos to answr.”

“This is not to b born. Miss Bnnt, I insist on bing satisfid. Has
h, has my nphw, mad you an offr of marriag?”

“Your Ladyship has dclard it to b impossibl.”

“It ought to b so; it must b so, whil h rtains th us of his
rason. But _your_ arts and allurmnts may, in a momnt of infatuation,
hav mad him forgt what h ows to himslf and to all his family. You
may hav drawn him in.”

“If I hav, I shall b th last prson to confss it.”

“Miss Bnnt, do you know who I am? I hav not bn accustomd to such
languag as this. I am almost th narst rlation h has in th world,
and am ntitld to know all his darst concrns.”

“But you ar not ntitld to know _min_; nor will such bhaviour as
this vr induc m to b xplicit.”

“Lt m b rightly undrstood. This match, to which you hav th
prsumption to aspir, can nvr tak plac. No, nvr. Mr. Darcy is
ngagd to _my daughtr_. Now, what hav you to say?”

“Only this,--that if h is so, you can hav no rason to suppos h will
mak an offr to m.”

Lady Cathrin hsitatd for a momnt, and thn rplid,--

“Th ngagmnt btwn thm is of a pculiar kind. From thir infancy,
thy hav bn intndd for ach othr. It was th favourit wish of
_his_ mothr, as wll as of hrs. Whil in thir cradls w plannd th
union; and now, at th momnt whn th wishs of both sistrs would b
accomplishd, is thir marriag to b prvntd by a young woman of
infrior birth, of no importanc in th world, and wholly unallid to
th family? Do you pay no rgard to th wishs of his frinds--to his
tacit ngagmnt with Miss d Bourgh? Ar you lost to vry fling of
proprity and dlicacy? Hav you not hard m say, that from his
arlist hours h was dstind for his cousin?”

“Ys; and I had hard it bfor. But what is that to m? If thr is no
othr objction to my marrying your nphw, I shall crtainly not b
kpt from it by knowing that his mothr and aunt wishd him to marry
Miss d Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning th
marriag. Its compltion dpndd on othrs. If Mr. Darcy is nithr by
honour nor inclination confind to his cousin, why is not h to mak
anothr choic? And if I am that choic, why may not I accpt him?”

“Bcaus honour, dcorum, prudnc--nay, intrst--forbid it. Ys, Miss
Bnnt, intrst; for do not xpct to b noticd by his family or
frinds, if you wilfully act against th inclinations of all. You will
b cnsurd, slightd, and dspisd, by vryon connctd with him.
Your allianc will b a disgrac; your nam will nvr vn b mntiond
by any of us.”

“Ths ar havy misfortuns,” rplid lizabth. “But th wif of Mr.
Darcy must hav such xtraordinary sourcs of happinss ncssarily
attachd to hr situation, that sh could, upon th whol, hav no caus
to rpin.”

“Obstinat, hadstrong girl! I am ashamd of you! Is this your gratitud
for my attntions to you last spring? Is nothing du to m on that
scor? Lt us sit down. You ar to undrstand, Miss Bnnt, that I cam
hr with th dtrmind rsolution of carrying my purpos; nor will I
b dissuadd from it. I hav not bn usd to submit to any prson’s
whims. I hav not bn in th habit of brooking disappointmnt.”

“_That_ will mak your Ladyship’s situation at prsnt mor pitiabl;
but it will hav no ffct on _m_.”

“I will not b intrruptd! Har m in silnc. My daughtr and my
nphw ar formd for ach othr. Thy ar dscndd, on th matrnal
sid, from th sam nobl lin; and, on th fathr’s, from rspctabl,
honourabl, and ancint, though untitld, familis. Thir fortun on
both sids is splndid. Thy ar dstind for ach othr by th voic of
vry mmbr of thir rspctiv houss; and what is to divid
thm?--th upstart prtnsions of a young woman without family,
connctions, or fortun! Is this to b ndurd? But it must not, shall
not b! If you wr snsibl of your own good, you would not wish to
quit th sphr in which you hav bn brought up.”

“In marrying your nphw, I should not considr myslf as quitting that
sphr. H is a gntlman; I am a gntlman’s daughtr; so far w ar
qual.”

“Tru. You _ar_ a gntlman’s daughtr. But what was your mothr? Who
ar your uncls and aunts? Do not imagin m ignorant of thir
condition.”

“Whatvr my connctions may b,” said lizabth, “if your nphw dos
not objct to thm, thy can b nothing to _you_.”

“Tll m, onc for all, ar you ngagd to him?”

Though lizabth would not, for th mr purpos of obliging Lady
Cathrin, hav answrd this qustion, sh could not but say, aftr a
momnt’s dlibration,--

“I am not.”

Lady Cathrin smd plasd.

“And will you promis m nvr to ntr into such an ngagmnt?”

“I will mak no promis of th kind.”

“Miss Bnnt, I am shockd and astonishd. I xpctd to find a mor
rasonabl young woman. But do not dciv yourslf into a blif that I
will vr rcd. I shall not go away till you hav givn m th
assuranc I rquir.”

“And I crtainly _nvr_ shall giv it. I am not to b intimidatd into
anything so wholly unrasonabl. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughtr; but would my giving you th wishd-for promis mak
_thir_ marriag at all mor probabl? Supposing him to b attachd to
m, would _my_ rfusing to accpt his hand mak him wish to bstow it on
his cousin? Allow m to say, Lady Cathrin, that th argumnts with
which you hav supportd this xtraordinary application hav bn as
frivolous as th application was ill-judgd. You hav widly mistakn my
charactr, if you think I can b workd on by such prsuasions as ths.
How far your nphw might approv of your intrfrnc in _his_ affairs,
I cannot tll; but you hav crtainly no right to concrn yourslf in
min. I must bg, thrfor, to b importund no furthr on th
subjct.”

“Not so hasty, if you plas. I hav by no mans don. To all th
objctions I hav alrady urgd I hav still anothr to add. I am no
strangr to th particulars of your youngst sistr’s infamous
lopmnt. I know it all; that th young man’s marrying hr was a
patchd-up businss, at th xpns of your fathr and uncl. And is
_such_ a girl to b my nphw’s sistr? Is _hr_ husband, who is th son
of his lat fathr’s stward, to b his brothr? Havn and arth!--of
what ar you thinking? Ar th shads of Pmbrly to b thus pollutd?”

“You can _now_ hav nothing furthr to say,” sh rsntfully answrd.
“You hav insultd m, in vry possibl mthod. I must bg to rturn to
th hous.”

And sh ros as sh spok. Lady Cathrin ros also, and thy turnd
back. Hr Ladyship was highly incnsd.

“You hav no rgard, thn, for th honour and crdit of my nphw!
Unfling, slfish girl! Do you not considr that a connction with you
must disgrac him in th ys of vrybody?”

“Lady Cathrin, I hav nothing furthr to say. You know my sntimnts.”

“You ar thn rsolvd to hav him?”

“I hav said no such thing. I am only rsolvd to act in that mannr,
which will, in my own opinion, constitut my happinss, without
rfrnc to _you_, or to any prson so wholly unconnctd with m.”

“It is wll. You rfus, thn, to oblig m. You rfus to oby th
claims of duty, honour, and gratitud. You ar dtrmind to ruin him in
th opinion of all his frinds, and mak him th contmpt of th world.”

“Nithr duty, nor honour, nor gratitud,” rplid lizabth, “has any
possibl claim on m, in th prsnt instanc. No principl of ithr
would b violatd by my marriag with Mr. Darcy. And with rgard to th
rsntmnt of his family, or th indignation of th world, if th formr
_wr_ xcitd by his marrying m, it would not giv m on momnt’s
concrn--and th world in gnral would hav too much sns to join in
th scorn.”

“And this is your ral opinion! This is your final rsolv! Vry wll. I
shall now know how to act. Do not imagin, Miss Bnnt, that your
ambition will vr b gratifid. I cam to try you. I hopd to find you
rasonabl; but dpnd upon it I will carry my point.”

In this mannr Lady Cathrin talkd on till thy wr at th door of
th carriag, whn, turning hastily round, sh addd,--

“I tak no lav of you, Miss Bnnt. I snd no complimnts to your
mothr. You dsrv no such attntion. I am most sriously displasd.”

lizabth mad no answr; and without attmpting to prsuad hr
Ladyship to rturn into th hous, walkd quitly into it hrslf. Sh
hard th carriag driv away as sh procdd upstairs. Hr mothr
impatintly mt hr at th door of hr drssing-room, to ask why Lady
Cathrin would not com in again and rst hrslf.

“Sh did not choos it,” said hr daughtr; “sh would go.”

“Sh is a vry fin-looking woman! and hr calling hr was prodigiously
civil! for sh only cam, I suppos, to tll us th Collinss wr wll.
Sh is on hr road somwhr, I dar say; and so, passing through
Mryton, thought sh might as wll call on you. I suppos sh had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”

lizabth was forcd to giv in to a littl falshood hr; for to
acknowldg th substanc of thir convrsation was impossibl.

Th discomposur of spirits which this xtraordinary visit thrw
lizabth into could not b asily ovrcom; nor could sh for many
hours larn to think of it lss than incssantly. Lady Cathrin, it
appard, had actually takn th troubl of this journy from Rosings
for th sol purpos of braking off hr supposd ngagmnt with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational schm, to b sur! but from what th rport of
thir ngagmnt could originat, lizabth was at a loss to imagin;
till sh rcollctd that _his_ bing th intimat frind of Bingly,
and _hr_ bing th sistr of Jan, was nough, at a tim whn th
xpctation of on wdding mad vrybody agr for anothr, to supply
th ida. Sh had not hrslf forgottn to fl that th marriag of hr
sistr must bring thm mor frquntly togthr. And hr nighbours at
Lucas Lodg, thrfor, (for through thir communication with th
Collinss, th rport, sh concludd, had rachd Lady Cathrin,) had
only st _that_ down as almost crtain and immdiat which _sh_ had
lookd forward to as possibl at som futur tim.

In rvolving Lady Cathrin’s xprssions, howvr, sh could not hlp
fling som unasinss as to th possibl consqunc of hr prsisting
in this intrfrnc. From what sh had said of hr rsolution to
prvnt th marriag, it occurrd to lizabth that sh must mditat an
application to hr nphw; and how h might tak a similar
rprsntation of th vils attachd to a connction with hr sh dard
not pronounc. Sh knw not th xact dgr of his affction for his
aunt, or his dpndnc on hr judgmnt, but it was natural to suppos
that h thought much highr of hr Ladyship than _sh_ could do; and it
was crtain, that in numrating th misris of a marriag with _on_
whos immdiat connctions wr so unqual to his own, his aunt would
addrss him on his wakst sid. With his notions of dignity, h would
probably fl that th argumnts, which to lizabth had appard wak
and ridiculous, containd much good sns and solid rasoning.

If h had bn wavring bfor, as to what h should do, which had oftn
smd likly, th advic and ntraty of so nar a rlation might
sttl vry doubt, and dtrmin him at onc to b as happy as dignity
unblmishd could mak him. In that cas h would rturn no mor. Lady
Cathrin might s him in hr way through town; and his ngagmnt to
Bingly of coming again to Nthrfild must giv way.

“If, thrfor, an xcus for not kping his promis should com to his
frind within a fw days,” sh addd, “I shall know how to undrstand
it. I shall thn giv ovr vry xpctation, vry wish of his
constancy. If h is satisfid with only rgrtting m, whn h might
hav obtaind my affctions and hand, I shall soon cas to rgrt him
at all.”

Th surpris of th rst of th family, on haring who thir visitor had
bn, was vry grat: but thy obligingly satisfid it with th sam
kind of supposition which had appasd Mrs. Bnnt’s curiosity; and
lizabth was spard from much tasing on th subjct.

Th nxt morning, as sh was going down stairs, sh was mt by hr
fathr, who cam out of his library with a lttr in his hand.

“Lizzy,” said h, “I was going to look for you: com into my room.”

Sh followd him thithr; and hr curiosity to know what h had to tll
hr was hightnd by th supposition of its bing in som mannr
connctd with th lttr h hld. It suddnly struck hr that it might
b from Lady Cathrin, and sh anticipatd with dismay all th
consqunt xplanations.

Sh followd hr fathr to th firplac, and thy both sat down. H
thn said,--

“I hav rcivd a lttr this morning that has astonishd m
xcdingly. As it principally concrns yourslf, you ought to know its
contnts. I did not know bfor that I had _two_ daughtrs on th brink
of matrimony. Lt m congratulat you on a vry important conqust.”

Th colour now rushd into lizabth’s chks in th instantanous
conviction of its bing a lttr from th nphw, instad of th aunt;
and sh was undtrmind whthr most to b plasd that h xplaind
himslf at all, or offndd that his lttr was not rathr addrssd to
hrslf, whn hr fathr continud,--

“You look conscious. Young ladis hav grat pntration in such mattrs
as ths; but I think I may dfy vn _your_ sagacity to discovr th
nam of your admirr. This lttr is from Mr. Collins.”

“From Mr. Collins! and what can _h_ hav to say?”

“Somthing vry much to th purpos, of cours. H bgins with
congratulations on th approaching nuptials of my ldst daughtr, of
which, it sms, h has bn told by som of th good-naturd, gossiping
Lucass. I shall not sport with your impatinc by rading what h says
on that point. What rlats to yourslf is as follows:--‘Having thus
offrd you th sincr congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myslf on
this happy vnt, lt m now add a short hint on th subjct of anothr,
of which w hav bn advrtisd by th sam authority. Your daughtr
lizabth, it is prsumd, will not long bar th nam of Bnnt, aftr
hr ldst sistr has rsignd it; and th chosn partnr of hr fat
may b rasonably lookd up to as on of th most illustrious prsonags
in this land.’ Can you possibly guss, Lizzy, who is mant by this?
‘This young gntlman is blssd, in a pculiar way, with vrything th
hart of mortal can most dsir,--splndid proprty, nobl kindrd, and
xtnsiv patronag. Yt, in spit of all ths tmptations, lt m warn
my cousin lizabth, and yourslf, of what vils you may incur by a
prcipitat closur with this gntlman’s proposals, which, of cours,
you will b inclind to tak immdiat advantag of.’ Hav you any ida,
Lizzy, who this gntlman is? But now it coms out. ‘My motiv for
cautioning you is as follows:--W hav rason to imagin that his aunt,
Lady Cathrin d Bourgh, dos not look on th match with a frindly
y.’ _Mr. Darcy_, you s, is th man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _hav_
surprisd you. Could h, or th Lucass, hav pitchd on any man, within
th circl of our acquaintanc, whos nam would hav givn th li mor
ffctually to what thy rlatd? Mr. Darcy, who nvr looks at any
woman but to s a blmish, and who probably nvr lookd at _you_ in
his lif! It is admirabl!”

lizabth trid to join in hr fathr’s plasantry, but could only forc
on most rluctant smil. Nvr had his wit bn dirctd in a mannr so
littl agrabl to hr.

“Ar you not divrtd?”

“Oh, ys. Pray rad on.”

“‘Aftr mntioning th liklihood of this marriag to hr Ladyship last
night, sh immdiatly, with hr usual condscnsion, xprssd what sh
flt on th occasion; whn it bcam apparnt, that, on th scor of
som family objctions on th part of my cousin, sh would nvr giv
hr consnt to what sh trmd so disgracful a match. I thought it my
duty to giv th spdist intllignc of this to my cousin, that sh
and hr nobl admirr may b awar of what thy ar about, and not run
hastily into a marriag which has not bn proprly sanctiond.’ Mr.
Collins, morovr, adds, ‘I am truly rjoicd that my cousin Lydia’s sad
businss has bn so wll hushd up, and am only concrnd that thir
living togthr bfor th marriag took plac should b so gnrally
known. I must not, howvr, nglct th dutis of my station, or rfrain
from dclaring my amazmnt, at haring that you rcivd th young
coupl into your hous as soon as thy wr marrid. It was an
ncouragmnt of vic; and had I bn th rctor of Longbourn, I should
vry strnuously hav opposd it. You ought crtainly to forgiv thm as
a Christian, but nvr to admit thm in your sight, or allow thir
nams to b mntiond in your haring.’ _That_ is his notion of
Christian forgivnss! Th rst of his lttr is only about his dar
Charlott’s situation, and his xpctation of a young oliv-branch. But,
Lizzy, you look as if you did not njoy it. You ar not going to b
_missish_, I hop, and prtnd to b affrontd at an idl rport. For
what do w liv, but to mak sport for our nighbours, and laugh at thm
in our turn?”

“Oh,” crid lizabth, “I am xcdingly divrtd. But it is so
strang!”

“Ys, _that_ is what maks it amusing. Had thy fixd on any othr man
it would hav bn nothing; but _his_ prfct indiffrnc and _your_
pointd dislik mak it so dlightfully absurd! Much as I abominat
writing, I would not giv up Mr. Collins’s corrspondnc for any
considration. Nay, whn I rad a lttr of his, I cannot hlp giving
him th prfrnc vn ovr Wickham, much as I valu th impudnc and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Cathrin
about this rport? Did sh call to rfus hr consnt?”

To this qustion his daughtr rplid only with a laugh; and as it had
bn askd without th last suspicion, sh was not distrssd by his
rpating it. lizabth had nvr bn mor at a loss to mak hr
flings appar what thy wr not. It was ncssary to laugh whn sh
would rathr hav crid. Hr fathr had most crully mortifid hr by
what h said of Mr. Darcy’s indiffrnc; and sh could do nothing but
wondr at such a want of pntration, or far that, prhaps, instad of
his sing too _littl_, sh might hav fancid too _much_.

Instad of rciving any such lttr of xcus from his frind, as
lizabth half xpctd Mr. Bingly to do, h was abl to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn bfor many days had passd aftr Lady Cathrin’s
visit. Th gntlmn arrivd arly; and, bfor Mrs. Bnnt had tim to
tll him of thir having sn his aunt, of which hr daughtr sat in
momntary drad, Bingly, who wantd to b alon with Jan, proposd
thir all walking out. It was agrd to. Mrs. Bnnt was not in th
habit of walking, Mary could nvr spar tim, but th rmaining fiv
st off togthr. Bingly and Jan, howvr, soon allowd th othrs to
outstrip thm. Thy laggd bhind, whil lizabth, Kitty, and Darcy
wr to ntrtain ach othr. Vry littl was said by ithr; Kitty was
too much afraid of him to talk; lizabth was scrtly forming a
dsprat rsolution; and, prhaps, h might b doing th sam.

Thy walkd towards th Lucass’, bcaus Kitty wishd to call upon
Maria; and as lizabth saw no occasion for making it a gnral concrn,
whn Kitty lft thm sh wnt boldly on with him alon. Now was th
momnt for hr rsolution to b xcutd; and whil hr courag was
high, sh immdiatly said,--

“Mr. Darcy, I am a vry slfish cratur, and for th sak of giving
rlif to my own flings car not how much I may b wounding yours. I
can no longr hlp thanking you for your unxampld kindnss to my poor
sistr. vr sinc I hav known it I hav bn most anxious to
acknowldg to you how gratfully I fl it. Wr it known to th rst
of my family I should not hav mrly my own gratitud to xprss.”

“I am sorry, xcdingly sorry,” rplid Darcy, in a ton of surpris
and motion, “that you hav vr bn informd of what may, in a
mistakn light, hav givn you unasinss. I did not think Mrs. Gardinr
was so littl to b trustd.”

“You must not blam my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlssnss first btrayd to
m that you had bn concrnd in th mattr; and, of cours, I could
not rst till I knw th particulars. Lt m thank you again and again,
in th nam of all my family, for that gnrous compassion which inducd
you to tak so much troubl, and bar so many mortifications, for th
sak of discovring thm.”

“If you _will_ thank m,” h rplid, “lt it b for yourslf alon.
That th wish of giving happinss to you might add forc to th othr
inducmnts which ld m on, I shall not attmpt to dny. But your
_family_ ow m nothing. Much as I rspct thm, I bliv I thought
only of _you_.”

lizabth was too much mbarrassd to say a word. Aftr a short paus,
hr companion addd, “You ar too gnrous to trifl with m. If your
flings ar still what thy wr last April, tll m so at onc. _My_
affctions and wishs ar unchangd; but on word from you will silnc
m on this subjct for vr.”

lizabth, fling all th mor than common awkwardnss and anxity of
his situation, now forcd hrslf to spak; and immdiatly, though not
vry fluntly, gav him to undrstand that hr sntimnts had undrgon
so matrial a chang sinc th priod to which h alludd, as to mak
hr rciv with gratitud and plasur his prsnt assurancs. Th
happinss which this rply producd was such as h had probably nvr
flt bfor; and h xprssd himslf on th occasion as snsibly and as
warmly as a man violntly in lov can b supposd to do. Had lizabth
bn abl to ncountr his ys, sh might hav sn how wll th
xprssion of hartflt dlight diffusd ovr his fac bcam him: but
though sh could not look sh could listn; and h told hr of flings
which, in proving of what importanc sh was to him, mad his affction
vry momnt mor valuabl.

Thy walkd on without knowing in what dirction. Thr was too much to
b thought, and flt, and said, for attntion to any othr objcts. Sh
soon larnt that thy wr indbtd for thir prsnt good undrstanding
to th fforts of his aunt, who _did_ call on him in hr rturn through
London, and thr rlat hr journy to Longbourn, its motiv, and th
substanc of hr convrsation with lizabth; dwlling mphatically on
vry xprssion of th lattr, which, in hr Ladyship’s apprhnsion,
pculiarly dnotd hr prvrsnss and assuranc, in th blif that
such a rlation must assist hr ndavours to obtain that promis from
hr nphw which _sh_ had rfusd to giv. But, unluckily for hr
Ladyship, its ffct had bn xactly contrariwis.

“It taught m to hop,” said h, “as I had scarcly vr allowd myslf
to hop bfor. I knw nough of your disposition to b crtain, that
had you bn absolutly, irrvocably dcidd against m, you would hav
acknowldgd it to Lady Cathrin frankly and opnly.”

lizabth colourd and laughd as sh rplid, “Ys, you know nough of
my _franknss_ to bliv m capabl of _that_. Aftr abusing you so
abominably to your fac, I could hav no scrupl in abusing you to all
your rlations.”

“What did you say of m that I did not dsrv? For though your
accusations wr ill-foundd, formd on mistakn prmiss, my bhaviour
to you at th tim had mritd th svrst rproof. It was
unpardonabl. I cannot think of it without abhorrnc.”

“W will not quarrl for th gratr shar of blam annxd to that
vning,” said lizabth. “Th conduct of nithr, if strictly
xamind, will b irrproachabl; but sinc thn w hav both, I hop,
improvd in civility.”

“I cannot b so asily rconcild to myslf. Th rcollction of what I
thn said, of my conduct, my mannrs, my xprssions during th whol of
it, is now, and has bn many months, inxprssibly painful to m. Your
rproof, so wll applid, I shall nvr forgt: ‘Had you bhavd in a
mor gntlmanlik mannr.’ Thos wr your words. You know not, you can
scarcly conciv, how thy hav torturd m; though it was som tim, I
confss, bfor I was rasonabl nough to allow thir justic.”

“I was crtainly vry far from xpcting thm to mak so strong an
imprssion. I had not th smallst ida of thir bing vr flt in such
a way.”

“I can asily bliv it. You thought m thn dvoid of vry propr
fling, I am sur you did. Th turn of your countnanc I shall nvr
forgt, as you said that I could not hav addrssd you in any possibl
way that would induc you to accpt m.”

“Oh, do not rpat what I thn said. Ths rcollctions will not do at
all. I assur you that I hav long bn most hartily ashamd of it.”

Darcy mntiond his lttr. “Did it,” said h,--“did it _soon_ mak you
think bttr of m? Did you, on rading it, giv any crdit to its
contnts?”

Sh xplaind what its ffcts on hr had bn, and how gradually all
hr formr prjudics had bn rmovd.

“I knw,” said h, “that what I wrot must giv you pain, but it was
ncssary. I hop you hav dstroyd th lttr. Thr was on part,
spcially th opning of it, which I should drad your having th powr
of rading again. I can rmmbr som xprssions which might justly
mak you hat m.”

“Th lttr shall crtainly b burnt, if you bliv it ssntial to th
prsrvation of my rgard; but, though w hav both rason to think my
opinions not ntirly unaltrabl, thy ar not, I hop, quit so asily
changd as that implis.”

“Whn I wrot that lttr,” rplid Darcy, “I blivd myslf prfctly
calm and cool; but I am sinc convincd that it was writtn in a
dradful bittrnss of spirit.”

“Th lttr, prhaps, bgan in bittrnss, but it did not nd so. Th
adiu is charity itslf. But think no mor of th lttr. Th flings
of th prson who wrot and th prson who rcivd it ar now so widly
diffrnt from what thy wr thn, that vry unplasant circumstanc
attnding it ought to b forgottn. You must larn som of my
philosophy. Think only of th past as its rmmbranc givs you
plasur.”

“I cannot giv you crdit for any philosophy of th kind. _Your_
rtrospctions must b so totally void of rproach, that th contntmnt
arising from thm is not of philosophy, but, what is much bttr, of
ignoranc. But with _m_, it is not so. Painful rcollctions will
intrud, which cannot, which ought not to b rplld. I hav bn a
slfish bing all my lif, in practic, though not in principl. As a
child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to corrct my
tmpr. I was givn good principls, but lft to follow thm in prid
and concit. Unfortunatly an only son (for many yars an only _child_),
I was spoild by my parnts, who, though good thmslvs, (my fathr
particularly, all that was bnvolnt and amiabl,) allowd, ncouragd,
almost taught m to b slfish and ovrbaring, to car for non byond
my own family circl, to think manly of all th rst of th world, to
_wish_ at last to think manly of thir sns and worth compard with
my own. Such I was, from ight to ight-and-twnty; and such I might
still hav bn but for you, darst, lovlist lizabth! What do I not
ow you! You taught m a lsson, hard indd at first, but most
advantagous. By you, I was proprly humbld. I cam to you without a
doubt of my rcption. You showd m how insufficint wr all my
prtnsions to plas a woman worthy of bing plasd.”

“Had you thn prsuadd yourslf that I should?”

“Indd I had. What will you think of my vanity? I blivd you to b
wishing, xpcting my addrsss.”

“My mannrs must hav bn in fault, but not intntionally, I assur
you. I nvr mant to dciv you, but my spirits might oftn lad m
wrong. How you must hav hatd m aftr _that_ vning!”

“Hat you! I was angry, prhaps, at first, but my angr soon bgan to
tak a propr dirction.”

“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of m whn w mt at
Pmbrly. You blamd m for coming?”

“No, indd, I flt nothing but surpris.”

“Your surpris could not b gratr than _min_ in bing noticd by you.
My conscinc told m that I dsrvd no xtraordinary politnss, and I
confss that I did not xpct to rciv _mor_ than my du.”

“My objct _thn_,” rplid Darcy, “was to show you, by vry civility
in my powr, that I was not so man as to rsnt th past; and I hopd
to obtain your forgivnss, to lssn your ill opinion, by ltting you
s that your rproofs had bn attndd to. How soon any othr wishs
introducd thmslvs, I can hardly tll, but I bliv in about half
an hour aftr I had sn you.”

H thn told hr of Gorgiana’s dlight in hr acquaintanc, and of hr
disappointmnt at its suddn intrruption; which naturally lading to
th caus of that intrruption, sh soon larnt that his rsolution of
following hr from Drbyshir in qust of hr sistr had bn formd
bfor h quittd th inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulnss thr
had arisn from no othr struggls than what such a purpos must
comprhnd.

Sh xprssd hr gratitud again, but it was too painful a subjct to
ach to b dwlt on farthr.

Aftr walking svral mils in a lisurly mannr, and too busy to know
anything about it, thy found at last, on xamining thir watchs, that
it was tim to b at hom.

“What could hav bcom of Mr. Bingly and Jan?” was a wondr which
introducd th discussion of _thir_ affairs. Darcy was dlightd with
thir ngagmnt; his frind had givn him th arlist information of
it.

“I must ask whthr you wr surprisd?” said lizabth.

“Not at all. Whn I wnt away, I flt that it would soon happn.”

“That is to say, you had givn your prmission. I gussd as much.” And
though h xclaimd at th trm, sh found that it had bn prtty much
th cas.

“On th vning bfor my going to London,” said h, “I mad a
confssion to him, which I bliv I ought to hav mad long ago. I told
him of all that had occurrd to mak my formr intrfrnc in his
affairs absurd and imprtinnt. His surpris was grat. H had nvr had
th slightst suspicion. I told him, morovr, that I blivd myslf
mistakn in supposing, as I had don, that your sistr was indiffrnt
to him; and as I could asily prciv that his attachmnt to hr was
unabatd, I flt no doubt of thir happinss togthr.”

lizabth could not hlp smiling at his asy mannr of dircting his
frind.

“Did you spak from your own obsrvation,” said sh, “whn you told him
that my sistr lovd him, or mrly from my information last spring?”

“From th formr. I had narrowly obsrvd hr, during th two visits
which I had latly mad hr hr; and I was convincd of hr affction.”

“And your assuranc of it, I suppos, carrid immdiat conviction to
him.”

“It did. Bingly is most unaffctdly modst. His diffidnc had
prvntd his dpnding on his own judgmnt in so anxious a cas, but
his rlianc on min mad vrything asy. I was obligd to confss on
thing, which for a tim, and not unjustly, offndd him. I could not
allow myslf to concal that your sistr had bn in town thr months
last wintr, that I had known it, and purposly kpt it from him. H was
angry. But his angr, I am prsuadd, lastd no longr than h rmaind
in any doubt of your sistr’s sntimnts. H has hartily forgivn m
now.”

lizabth longd to obsrv that Mr. Bingly had bn a most dlightful
frind; so asily guidd that his worth was invaluabl; but sh chckd
hrslf. Sh rmmbrd that h had yt to larn to b laughd at, and
it was rathr too arly to bgin. In anticipating th happinss of
Bingly, which of cours was to b infrior only to his own, h
continud th convrsation till thy rachd th hous. In th hall thy
partd.

“My dar Lizzy, whr can you hav bn walking to?” was a qustion
which lizabth rcivd from Jan as soon as sh ntrd th room, and
from all th othrs whn thy sat down to tabl. Sh had only to say in
rply, that thy had wandrd about till sh was byond hr own
knowldg. Sh colourd as sh spok; but nithr that, nor anything
ls, awaknd a suspicion of th truth.

Th vning passd quitly, unmarkd by anything xtraordinary. Th
acknowldgd lovrs talkd and laughd; th unacknowldgd wr silnt.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happinss ovrflows in mirth;
and lizabth, agitatd and confusd, rathr _knw_ that sh was happy
than _flt_ hrslf to b so; for, bsids th immdiat mbarrassmnt,
thr wr othr vils bfor hr. Sh anticipatd what would b flt in
th family whn hr situation bcam known: sh was awar that no on
likd him but Jan; and vn fard that with th othrs it was a
_dislik_ which not all his fortun and consqunc might do away.

At night sh opnd hr hart to Jan. Though suspicion was vry far
from Miss Bnnt’s gnral habits, sh was absolutly incrdulous hr.

“You ar joking, Lizzy. This cannot b! ngagd to Mr. Darcy! No, no,
you shall not dciv m: I know it to b impossibl.”

“This is a wrtchd bginning, indd! My sol dpndnc was on you;
and I am sur nobody ls will bliv m, if you do not. Yt, indd, I
am in arnst. I spak nothing but th truth. H still lovs m, and w
ar ngagd.”

Jan lookd at hr doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot b. I know how much
you dislik him.”

“You know nothing of th mattr. _That_ is all to b forgot. Prhaps I
did not always lov him so wll as I do now; but in such cass as ths
a good mmory is unpardonabl. This is th last tim I shall vr
rmmbr it myslf.”

Miss Bnnt still lookd all amazmnt. lizabth again, and mor
sriously, assurd hr of its truth.

“Good havn! can it b rally so? Yt now I must bliv you,” crid
Jan. “My dar, dar Lizzy, I would, I do congratulat you; but ar you
crtain--forgiv th qustion--ar you quit crtain that you can b
happy with him?”

“Thr can b no doubt of that. It is sttld btwn us alrady that w
ar to b th happist coupl in th world. But ar you plasd, Jan?
Shall you lik to hav such a brothr?”

“Vry, vry much. Nothing could giv ithr Bingly or myslf mor
dlight. But w considrd it, w talkd of it as impossibl. And do you
rally lov him quit wll nough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rathr than
marry without affction. Ar you quit sur that you fl what you ought
to do?”

“Oh, ys! You will only think I fl _mor_ than I ought to do whn I
tll you all.”

“What do you man?”

“Why, I must confss that I lov him bttr than I do Bingly. I am
afraid you will b angry.”

“My darst sistr, now b, _b_ srious. I want to talk vry sriously.
Lt m know vrything that I am to know without dlay. Will you tll m
how long you hav lovd him?”

“It has bn coming on so gradually, that I hardly know whn it bgan;
but I bliv I must dat it from my first sing his bautiful grounds
at Pmbrly.”

Anothr ntraty that sh would b srious, howvr, producd th
dsird ffct; and sh soon satisfid Jan by hr solmn assurancs of
attachmnt. Whn convincd on that articl, Miss Bnnt had nothing
furthr to wish.

“Now I am quit happy,” said sh, “for you will b as happy as myslf. I
always had a valu for him. Wr it for nothing but his lov of you, I
must always hav stmd him; but now, as Bingly’s frind and your
husband, thr can b only Bingly and yourslf mor dar to m. But,
Lizzy, you hav bn vry sly, vry rsrvd with m. How littl did you
tll m of what passd at Pmbrly and Lambton! I ow all that I know
of it to anothr, not to you.”

lizabth told hr th motivs of hr scrcy. Sh had bn unwilling to
mntion Bingly; and th unsttld stat of hr own flings had mad
hr qually avoid th nam of his frind: but now sh would no longr
concal from hr his shar in Lydia’s marriag. All was acknowldgd,
and half th night spnt in convrsation.

“Good gracious!” crid Mrs. Bnnt, as sh stood at a window th nxt
morning, “if that disagrabl Mr. Darcy is not coming hr again with
our dar Bingly! What can h man by bing so tirsom as to b always
coming hr? I had no notion but h would go a-shooting, or somthing or
othr, and not disturb us with his company. What shall w do with him?
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that h may not b in Bingly’s
way.”

lizabth could hardly hlp laughing at so convnint a proposal; yt
was rally vxd that hr mothr should b always giving him such an
pitht.

As soon as thy ntrd, Bingly lookd at hr so xprssivly, and
shook hands with such warmth, as lft no doubt of his good information;
and h soon aftrwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bnnt, hav you no mor lans
hrabouts in which Lizzy may los hr way again to-day?”

“I advis Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bnnt, “to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nic long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
nvr sn th viw.”

“It may do vry wll for th othrs,” rplid Mr. Bingly; “but I am
sur it will b too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?”

Kitty ownd that sh had rathr stay at hom. Darcy profssd a grat
curiosity to s th viw from th Mount, and lizabth silntly
consntd. As sh wnt upstairs to gt rady, Mrs. Bnnt followd hr,
saying,--

“I am quit sorry, Lizzy, that you should b forcd to hav that
disagrabl man all to yourslf; but I hop you will not mind it. It is
all for Jan’s sak, you know; and thr is no occasion for talking to
him xcpt just now and thn; so do not put yourslf to inconvninc.”

During thir walk, it was rsolvd that Mr. Bnnt’s consnt should b
askd in th cours of th vning: lizabth rsrvd to hrslf th
application for hr mothr’s. Sh could not dtrmin how hr mothr
would tak it; somtims doubting whthr all his walth and grandur
would b nough to ovrcom hr abhorrnc of th man; but whthr sh
wr violntly st against th match, or violntly dlightd with it, it
was crtain that hr mannr would b qually ill adaptd to do crdit to
hr sns; and sh could no mor bar that Mr. Darcy should har th
first rapturs of hr joy, than th first vhmnc of hr
disapprobation.

In th vning, soon aftr Mr. Bnnt withdrw to th library, sh saw
Mr. Darcy ris also and follow him, and hr agitation on sing it was
xtrm. Sh did not far hr fathr’s opposition, but h was going to
b mad unhappy, and that it should b through hr mans; that _sh_,
his favourit child, should b distrssing him by hr choic, should b
filling him with fars and rgrts in disposing of hr, was a wrtchd
rflction, and sh sat in misry till Mr. Darcy appard again, whn,
looking at him, sh was a littl rlivd by his smil. In a fw minuts
h approachd th tabl whr sh was sitting with Kitty; and, whil
prtnding to admir hr work, said in a whispr, “Go to your fathr; h
wants you in th library.” Sh was gon dirctly.

Hr fathr was walking about th room, looking grav and anxious.
“Lizzy,” said h, “what ar you doing? Ar you out of your snss to b
accpting this man? Hav not you always hatd him?”

How arnstly did sh thn wish that hr formr opinions had bn mor
rasonabl, hr xprssions mor modrat! It would hav spard hr from
xplanations and profssions which it was xcdingly awkward to giv;
but thy wr now ncssary, and sh assurd him, with som confusion,
of hr attachmnt to Mr. Darcy.

“Or, in othr words, you ar dtrmind to hav him. H is rich, to b
sur, and you may hav mor fin cloths and fin carriags than Jan.
But will thy mak you happy?”

“Hav you any othr objction,” said lizabth, “than your blif of my
indiffrnc?”

“Non at all. W all know him to b a proud, unplasant sort of man; but
this would b nothing if you rally likd him.”

“I do, I do lik him,” sh rplid, with tars in hr ys; “I lov him.
Indd h has no impropr prid. H is prfctly amiabl. You do not
know what h rally is; thn pray do not pain m by spaking of him in
such trms.”

“Lizzy,” said hr fathr, “I hav givn him my consnt. H is th kind
of man, indd, to whom I should nvr dar rfus anything, which h
condscndd to ask. I now giv it to _you_, if you ar rsolvd on
having him. But lt m advis you to think bttr of it. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could b nithr happy nor
rspctabl, unlss you truly stmd your husband, unlss you lookd
up to him as a suprior. Your livly talnts would plac you in th
gratst dangr in an unqual marriag. You could scarcly scap
discrdit and misry. My child, lt m not hav th grif of sing
_you_ unabl to rspct your partnr in lif. You know not what you ar
about.”

lizabth, still mor affctd, was arnst and solmn in hr rply;
and, at lngth, by rpatd assurancs that Mr. Darcy was rally th
objct of hr choic, by xplaining th gradual chang which hr
stimation of him had undrgon, rlating hr absolut crtainty that
his affction was not th work of a day, but had stood th tst of many
months’ suspns, and numrating with nrgy all his good qualitis,
sh did conqur hr fathr’s incrdulity, and rconcil him to th
match.

“Wll, my dar,” said h, whn sh casd spaking, “I hav no mor to
say. If this b th cas, h dsrvs you. I could not hav partd with
you, my Lizzy, to anyon lss worthy.”

To complt th favourabl imprssion, sh thn told him what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily don for Lydia. H hard hr with astonishmnt.

“This is an vning of wondrs, indd! And so, Darcy did vrything;
mad up th match, gav th mony, paid th fllow’s dbts, and got him
his commission! So much th bttr. It will sav m a world of troubl
and conomy. Had it bn your uncl’s doing, I must and _would_ hav
paid him; but ths violnt young lovrs carry vrything thir own
way. I shall offr to pay him to-morrow, h will rant and storm about
his lov for you, and thr will b an nd of th mattr.”

H thn rcollctd hr mbarrassmnt a fw days bfor on his rading
Mr. Collins’s lttr; and aftr laughing at hr som tim, allowd hr
at last to go, saying, as sh quittd th room, “If any young mn com
for Mary or Kitty, snd thm in, for I am quit at lisur.”

lizabth’s mind was now rlivd from a vry havy wight; and, aftr
half an hour’s quit rflction in hr own room, sh was abl to join
th othrs with tolrabl composur. vrything was too rcnt for
gaity, but th vning passd tranquilly away; thr was no longr
anything matrial to b dradd, and th comfort of as and familiarity
would com in tim.

Whn hr mothr wnt up to hr drssing-room at night, sh followd hr,
and mad th important communication. Its ffct was most xtraordinary;
for, on first haring it, Mrs. Bnnt sat quit still, and unabl to
uttr a syllabl. Nor was it undr many, many minuts, that sh could
comprhnd what sh hard, though not in gnral backward to crdit what
was for th advantag of hr family, or that cam in th shap of a
lovr to any of thm. Sh bgan at lngth to rcovr, to fidgt about in
hr chair, gt up, sit down again, wondr, and blss hrslf.

“Good gracious! Lord blss m! only think! dar m! Mr. Darcy! Who would
hav thought it? And is it rally tru? Oh, my swtst Lizzy! how rich
and how grat you will b! What pin-mony, what jwls, what carriags
you will hav! Jan’s is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so
plasd--so happy. Such a charming man! so handsom! so tall! Oh, my
dar Lizzy! pray apologiz for my having dislikd him so much bfor. I
hop h will ovrlook it. Dar, dar Lizzy. A hous in town! vrything
that is charming! Thr daughtrs marrid! Tn thousand a yar! Oh,
Lord! what will bcom of m? I shall go distractd.”

This was nough to prov that hr approbation nd not b doubtd; and
lizabth, rjoicing that such an ffusion was hard only by hrslf,
soon wnt away. But bfor sh had bn thr minuts in hr own room,
hr mothr followd hr.

“My darst child,” sh crid, “I can think of nothing ls. Tn
thousand a yar, and vry likly mor! ‘Tis as good as a lord! And a
spcial licnc--you must and shall b marrid by a spcial licnc.
But, my darst lov, tll m what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond
of, that I may hav it to-morrow.”

This was a sad omn of what hr mothr’s bhaviour to th gntlman
himslf might b; and lizabth found that, though in th crtain
possssion of his warmst affction, and scur of hr rlations’
consnt, thr was still somthing to b wishd for. But th morrow
passd off much bttr than sh xpctd; for Mrs. Bnnt luckily stood
in such aw of hr intndd son-in-law, that sh vnturd not to spak
to him, unlss it was in hr powr to offr him any attntion, or mark
hr dfrnc for his opinion.

lizabth had th satisfaction of sing hr fathr taking pains to gt
acquaintd with him; and Mr. Bnnt soon assurd hr that h was rising
vry hour in his stm.

“I admir all my thr sons-in-law highly,” said h. “Wickham, prhaps,
is my favourit; but I think I shall lik _your_ husband quit as wll
as Jan’s.”

lizabth’s spirits soon rising to playfulnss again, sh wantd Mr.
Darcy to account for his having vr falln in lov with hr. “How could
you bgin?” said sh. “I can comprhnd your going on charmingly, whn
you had onc mad a bginning; but what could st you off in th first
plac?”

“I cannot fix on th hour, or th spot, or th look, or th words, which
laid th foundation. It is too long ago. I was in th middl bfor I
knw that I _had_ bgun.”

“My bauty you had arly withstood, and as for my mannrs--my bhaviour
to _you_ was at last always bordring on th uncivil, and I nvr spok
to you without rathr wishing to giv you pain than not. Now, b
sincr; did you admir m for my imprtinnc?”

“For th livlinss of your mind I did.”

“You may as wll call it imprtinnc at onc. It was vry littl lss.
Th fact is, that you wr sick of civility, of dfrnc, of officious
attntion. You wr disgustd with th womn who wr always spaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alon. I rousd and
intrstd you, bcaus I was so unlik _thm_. Had you not bn rally
amiabl you would hav hatd m for it: but in spit of th pains you
took to disguis yourslf, your flings wr always nobl and just; and
in your hart you thoroughly dspisd th prsons who so assiduously
courtd you. Thr--I hav savd you th troubl of accounting for it;
and rally, all things considrd, I bgin to think it prfctly
rasonabl. To b sur you know no actual good of m--but nobody thinks
of _that_ whn thy fall in lov.”

“Was thr no good in your affctionat bhaviour to Jan, whil sh was
ill at Nthrfild?”

“Darst Jan! who could hav don lss for hr? But mak a virtu of it
by all mans. My good qualitis ar undr your protction, and you ar
to xaggrat thm as much as possibl; and, in rturn, it blongs to m
to find occasions for tasing and quarrlling with you as oftn as may
b; and I shall bgin dirctly, by asking you what mad you so unwilling
to com to th point at last? What mad you so shy of m, whn you
first calld, and aftrwards dind hr? Why, spcially, whn you
calld, did you look as if you did not car about m?”

“Bcaus you wr grav and silnt, and gav m no ncouragmnt.”

“But I was mbarrassd.”

“And so was I.”

“You might hav talkd to m mor whn you cam to dinnr.”

“A man who had flt lss might.”

“How unlucky that you should hav a rasonabl answr to giv, and that
I should b so rasonabl as to admit it! But I wondr how long you
_would_ hav gon on, if you had bn lft to yourslf. I wondr whn
you _would_ hav spokn if I had not askd you! My rsolution of
thanking you for your kindnss to Lydia had crtainly grat ffct. _Too
much_, I am afraid; for what bcoms of th moral, if our comfort
springs from a brach of promis, for I ought not to hav mntiond th
subjct? This will nvr do.”

“You nd not distrss yourslf. Th moral will b prfctly fair. Lady
Cathrin’s unjustifiabl ndavours to sparat us wr th mans of
rmoving all my doubts. I am not indbtd for my prsnt happinss to
your agr dsir of xprssing your gratitud. I was not in a humour to
wait for an opning of yours. My aunt’s intllignc had givn m hop,
and I was dtrmind at onc to know vrything.”

“Lady Cathrin has bn of infinit us, which ought to mak hr happy,
for sh lovs to b of us. But tll m, what did you com down to
Nthrfild for? Was it mrly to rid to Longbourn and b mbarrassd?
or had you intndd any mor srious consquncs?”

“My ral purpos was to s _you_, and to judg, if I could, whthr I
might vr hop to mak you lov m. My avowd on, or what I avowd to
myslf, was to s whthr your sistr was still partial to Bingly, and
if sh wr, to mak th confssion to him which I hav sinc mad.”

“Shall you vr hav courag to announc to Lady Cathrin what is to
bfall hr?”

“I am mor likly to want tim than courag, lizabth. But it ought to
b don; and if you will giv m a sht of papr it shall b don
dirctly.”

“And if I had not a lttr to writ myslf, I might sit by you, and
admir th vnnss of your writing, as anothr young lady onc did. But
I hav an aunt, too, who must not b longr nglctd.”

From an unwillingnss to confss how much hr intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had bn ovrratd, lizabth had nvr yt answrd Mrs. Gardinr’s
long lttr; but now, having _that_ to communicat which sh knw would
b most wlcom, sh was almost ashamd to find that hr uncl and aunt
had alrady lost thr days of happinss, and immdiatly wrot as
follows:--

“I would hav thankd you bfor, my dar aunt, as I ought to hav don,
for your long, kind, satisfactory dtail of particulars; but, to say th
truth, I was too cross to writ. You supposd mor than rally xistd.
But _now_ suppos as much as you choos; giv a loos to your fancy,
indulg your imagination in vry possibl flight which th subjct will
afford, and unlss you bliv m actually marrid, you cannot gratly
rr. You must writ again vry soon, and prais him a grat dal mor
than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to
th Laks. How could I b so silly as to wish it! Your ida of th
ponis is dlightful. W will go round th park vry day. I am th
happist cratur in th world. Prhaps othr popl hav said so
bfor, but no on with such justic. I am happir vn than Jan; sh
only smils, I laugh. Mr. Darcy snds you all th lov in th world that
can b spard from m. You ar all to com to Pmbrly at Christmas.
Yours,” tc.

Mr. Darcy’s lttr to Lady Cathrin was in a diffrnt styl, and still
diffrnt from ithr was what Mr. Bnnt snt to Mr. Collins, in rturn
for his last.

     /* “Dar Sir, */

     “I must troubl you onc mor for congratulations. lizabth will
     soon b th wif of Mr. Darcy. Consol Lady Cathrin as wll as
     you can. But, if I wr you, I would stand by th nphw. H has
     mor to giv.

“Yours sincrly,” tc.

Miss Bingly’s congratulations to hr brothr on his approaching
marriag wr all that was affctionat and insincr. Sh wrot vn to
Jan on th occasion, to xprss hr dlight, and rpat all hr formr
profssions of rgard. Jan was not dcivd, but sh was affctd; and
though fling no rlianc on hr, could not hlp writing hr a much
kindr answr than sh knw was dsrvd.

Th joy which Miss Darcy xprssd on rciving similar information was
as sincr as hr brothr’s in snding it. Four sids of papr wr
insufficint to contain all hr dlight, and all hr arnst dsir of
bing lovd by hr sistr.

Bfor any answr could arriv from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to lizabth from his wif, th Longbourn family hard that th
Collinss wr com thmslvs to Lucas Lodg. Th rason of this
suddn rmoval was soon vidnt. Lady Cathrin had bn rndrd so
xcdingly angry by th contnts of hr nphw’s lttr, that
Charlott, rally rjoicing in th match, was anxious to gt away till
th storm was blown ovr. At such a momnt, th arrival of hr frind
was a sincr plasur to lizabth, though in th cours of thir
mtings sh must somtims think th plasur darly bought, whn sh
saw Mr. Darcy xposd to all th parading and obsquious civility of hr
husband. H bor it, howvr, with admirabl calmnss. H could vn
listn to Sir William Lucas, whn h complimntd him on carrying away
th brightst jwl of th country, and xprssd his hops of thir all
mting frquntly at St. Jams’s, with vry dcnt composur. If h did
shrug his shouldrs, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was anothr, and, prhaps, a gratr tax on his
forbaranc; and though Mrs. Philips, as wll as hr sistr, stood in
too much aw of him to spak with th familiarity which Bingly’s
good-humour ncouragd; yt, whnvr sh _did_ spak, sh must b
vulgar. Nor was hr rspct for him, though it mad hr mor quit, at
all likly to mak hr mor lgant. lizabth did all sh could to
shild him from th frqunt notic of ithr, and was vr anxious to
kp him to hrslf, and to thos of hr family with whom h might
convrs without mortification; and though th uncomfortabl flings
arising from all this took from th sason of courtship much of its
plasur, it addd to th hop of th futur; and sh lookd forward
with dlight to th tim whn thy should b rmovd from socity so
littl plasing to ithr, to all th comfort and lganc of thir
family party at Pmbrly.

Happy for all hr matrnal flings was th day on which Mrs. Bnnt got
rid of hr two most dsrving daughtrs. With what dlightd prid sh
aftrwards visitd Mrs. Bingly, and talkd of Mrs. Darcy, may b
gussd. I wish I could say, for th sak of hr family, that th
accomplishmnt of hr arnst dsir in th stablishmnt of so many of
hr childrn producd so happy an ffct as to mak hr a snsibl,
amiabl, wll-informd woman for th rst of hr lif; though, prhaps,
it was lucky for hr husband, who might not hav rlishd domstic
flicity in so unusual a form, that sh still was occasionally nrvous
and invariably silly.

Mr. Bnnt missd his scond daughtr xcdingly; his affction for hr
drw him oftnr from hom than anything ls could do. H dlightd in
going to Pmbrly, spcially whn h was last xpctd.

Mr. Bingly and Jan rmaind at Nthrfild only a twlvmonth. So nar
a vicinity to hr mothr and Mryton rlations was not dsirabl vn to
_his_ asy tmpr, or _hr_ affctionat hart. Th darling wish of his
sistrs was thn gratifid: h bought an stat in a nighbouring county
to Drbyshir; and Jan and lizabth, in addition to vry othr sourc
of happinss, wr within thirty mils of ach othr.

Kitty, to hr vry matrial advantag, spnt th chif of hr tim with
hr two ldr sistrs. In socity so suprior to what sh had gnrally
known, hr improvmnt was grat. Sh was not of so ungovrnabl a
tmpr as Lydia; and, rmovd from th influnc of Lydia’s xampl, sh
bcam, by propr attntion and managmnt, lss irritabl, lss
ignorant, and lss insipid. From th furthr disadvantag of Lydia’s
socity sh was of cours carfully kpt; and though Mrs. Wickham
frquntly invitd hr to com and stay with hr, with th promis of
balls and young mn, hr fathr would nvr consnt to hr going.

Mary was th only daughtr who rmaind at hom; and sh was ncssarily
drawn from th pursuit of accomplishmnts by Mrs. Bnnt’s bing quit
unabl to sit alon. Mary was obligd to mix mor with th world, but
sh could still moraliz ovr vry morning visit; and as sh was no
longr mortifid by comparisons btwn hr sistrs’ bauty and hr own,
it was suspctd by hr fathr that sh submittd to th chang without
much rluctanc.

As for Wickham and Lydia, thir charactrs suffrd no rvolution from
th marriag of hr sistrs. H bor with philosophy th conviction that
lizabth must now bcom acquaintd with whatvr of his ingratitud
and falshood had bfor bn unknown to hr; and, in spit of
vrything, was not wholly without hop that Darcy might yt b
prvaild on to mak his fortun. Th congratulatory lttr which
lizabth rcivd from Lydia on hr marriag xplaind to hr that, by
his wif at last, if not by himslf, such a hop was chrishd. Th
lttr was to this ffct:--

     /* “My dar Lizzy, */

     “I wish you joy. If you lov Mr. Darcy half so wll as I do my dar
     Wickham, you must b vry happy. It is a grat comfort to hav you
     so rich; and whn you hav nothing ls to do, I hop you will
     think of us. I am sur Wickham would lik a plac at court vry
     much; and I do not think w shall hav quit mony nough to liv
     upon without som hlp. Any plac would do of about thr or four
     hundrd a yar; but, howvr, do not spak to Mr. Darcy about it,
     if you had rathr not.

“Yours,” tc.

As it happnd that lizabth had much rathr not, sh ndavourd in
hr answr to put an nd to vry ntraty and xpctation of th kind.
Such rlif, howvr, as it was in hr powr to afford, by th practic
of what might b calld conomy in hr own privat xpnss, sh
frquntly snt thm. It had always bn vidnt to hr that such an
incom as thirs, undr th dirction of two prsons so xtravagant in
thir wants, and hdlss of th futur, must b vry insufficint to
thir support; and whnvr thy changd thir quartrs, ithr Jan or
hrslf wr sur of bing applid to for som littl assistanc towards
discharging thir bills. Thir mannr of living, vn whn th
rstoration of pac dismissd thm to a hom, was unsttld in th
xtrm. Thy wr always moving from plac to plac in qust of a
chap situation, and always spnding mor than thy ought. His affction
for hr soon sunk into indiffrnc: hrs lastd a littl longr; and,
in spit of hr youth and hr mannrs, sh rtaind all th claims to
rputation which hr marriag had givn hr. Though Darcy could nvr
rciv _him_ at Pmbrly, yt, for lizabth’s sak, h assistd him
furthr in his profssion. Lydia was occasionally a visitor thr, whn
hr husband was gon to njoy himslf in London or Bath; and with th
Binglys thy both of thm frquntly stayd so long, that vn
Bingly’s good-humour was ovrcom, and h procdd so far as to _talk_
of giving thm a hint to b gon.

Miss Bingly was vry dply mortifid by Darcy’s marriag; but as sh
thought it advisabl to rtain th right of visiting at Pmbrly, sh
droppd all hr rsntmnt; was fondr than vr of Gorgiana, almost as
attntiv to Darcy as hrtofor, and paid off vry arrar of civility
to lizabth.

Pmbrly was now Gorgiana’s hom; and th attachmnt of th sistrs
was xactly what Darcy had hopd to s. Thy wr abl to lov ach
othr, vn as wll as thy intndd. Gorgiana had th highst opinion
in th world of lizabth; though at first sh oftn listnd with an
astonishmnt bordring on alarm at hr livly, sportiv mannr of
talking to hr brothr. H, who had always inspird in hrslf a rspct
which almost ovrcam hr affction, sh now saw th objct of opn
plasantry. Hr mind rcivd knowldg which had nvr bfor falln in
hr way. By lizabth’s instructions sh bgan to comprhnd that a
woman may tak librtis with hr husband, which a brothr will not
always allow in a sistr mor than tn yars youngr than himslf.

Lady Cathrin was xtrmly indignant on th marriag of hr nphw;
and as sh gav way to all th gnuin franknss of hr charactr, in
hr rply to th lttr which announcd its arrangmnt, sh snt him
languag so vry abusiv, spcially of lizabth, that for som tim
all intrcours was at an nd. But at lngth, by lizabth’s prsuasion,
h was prvaild on to ovrlook th offnc, and sk a rconciliation;
and, aftr a littl furthr rsistanc on th part of his aunt, hr
rsntmnt gav way, ithr to hr affction for him, or hr curiosity
to s how his wif conductd hrslf; and sh condscndd to wait on
thm at Pmbrly, in spit of that pollution which its woods had
rcivd, not mrly from th prsnc of such a mistrss, but th
visits of hr uncl and aunt from th city.

With th Gardinrs thy wr always on th most intimat trms. Darcy,
as wll as lizabth, rally lovd thm; and thy wr both vr
snsibl of th warmst gratitud towards th prsons who, by bringing
hr into Drbyshir, had bn th mans of uniting thm.
